————————
Number 9of2007
————————
EDUCATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definitions.
2. Amendment of section 2 of Act of 1998.3. Amendment of section 13 of Act of 1998.4. Amendment of section 29 of Act of 1998.5. Amendment of section 53 of Act of 1998.6. Amendment of Act of 2000.7. Transfer of lands from City of Cork Vocational Education
Committee.
8. Expenses.9. Short title, collective citation and commencement.
————————2[No. 9.] [2007.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
Acts Referred to
Education (Welfare) Act 2000 2000, No. 22
Education Act 1998 1998, No. 51Education Acts 1878 to 2001Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act
2004 2004, No. 30————————
Number 9of2007
————————
EDUCATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR CERTAIN CHANGES IN THE
HEARING OF APPEALS UNDER SECTION 29 OF THEEDUCATION ACT 1998, TO PROVIDE FOR CERTAINCHANGES IN THE FUNCTIONS PERFORMED BY THEINSPECTORATE UNDER SECTION 13 OF THAT ACT, TOMAKE PROVISION WITH REGARD TO ACCESS TOCERTAIN INFORMATION UNDER THAT ACT, FORTHOSE AND OTHER PURPOSES TO AMEND THE EDU-CATION ACT 1998 AND THE EDUCATION (WELFARE)ACT 2000, TO PROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER OF CER-TAIN LANDS AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATEDMATTERS.
[31st March , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Act of 1998” means the Education Act 1998;“Act of 2000” means the Education (Welfare) Act 2000;“Minister” means the Minister for Education and Science.
2.—Section 2 of the Act of 1998 is amended, in subsection (1), by
inserting the following definition before the definition of “articlesof management”:
“ ‘Act of 2000’ means the Education (Welfare) Act 2000;”.
3.—Section 13 of the Act of 1998 is amended—
(a) in subsection (3), by deleting paragraphs ( a)(ii) and ( h),
(b) by deleting subsection (4), and
(c) by adding the following subsections:
“(13) The Chief Inspector, with the consent of the
Minister, may delegate the performance of one or more ofhis or her functions to an Inspector nominated by theChief Inspector and functions so delegated to such anInspector shall be performable by him or her accordingly.
3Definitions.
Amendment of
section 2 of Act of1998.
Amendment of
section 13 of Act of1998.S.3
Amendment of
section 29 of Act of1998.
4[No. 9.] [2007.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
(14) The Minister may appoint an Inspector to perform
the functions of the Chief Inspector during any period inwhich the Chief Inspector is temporarily unable to per-form his or her functions, whether because of absence, ill-health or for any other reason, and, for the duration ofthat period, the functions of the Chief Inspector shall beperformable by the Inspector so appointed accordingly.”.
4.—Section 29 of the Act of 1998 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) by substituting the following paragraph for para-
graph ( c):
“(c) refuses to enrol—
(i) a student in a school, or
(ii) a student to receive instruction on the
curriculum through Irish in a school,if that school provides for the teach-ing of subjects on the curriculumthrough Irish for some or all of itsstudents, or”,
and
(ii) by inserting “, subject to subsection (4D),” after
“Department of Education and Science and”,
(b) by substituting the following subsections for subsection (4)
and subsection (4A) (inserted by the Act of 2000):
“(4) In hearing and determining an appeal under this
section against a decision to which subsection (1)( a)o r( b)
applies an appeals committee shall have regard to—
(a) the nature, scale and persistence of any behav-
iour alleged to have given rise to, or contrib-uted to, the decision made by or on behalf ofthe board,
(b) the reasonableness of any efforts made by the
school to enable the student to whom theappeal relates (the ‘student concerned’) to par-ticipate in and benefit from education,
(c) the educational interests of the student con-
cerned and the desirability of enabling thestudent as far as practicable to participate inand benefit from education with his or herpeers,
(d) the educational interests of, and the effective
provision of education for, other students ofthe school and the maintenance of a classroomand school environment which is supportive oflearning among the students of the school andensures continuity of instruction provided to[2007.] [ No. 9.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
students in any classroom concerned and the
school,
(e) the safety, health and welfare of teachers,
students and staff of the school,
(f) the code of behaviour under section 23 of the
Act of 2000 and other relevant policies of theschool and—
(i) in the case of that code of behaviour, the
extent to which it is in compliance withthat section 23 and any guidelines issuedunder subsection (3) of that section, and
(ii) in the case of those other policies, the
extent to which each of them isimplemented, promotes equality of accessto and participation in education and is incompliance with—
(I) any enactment that imposes duties on
schools or their boards,
(II) any relevant guidelines or policies of
the Minister,
(g) the duties on schools or their boards imposed
by or under any enactment,
(h) guidelines issued pursuant to section 22(7) of
the Act of 2000, and
(i) such other matters as the appeals committee
considers relevant.
(4A) Nothing in subsection (4) affects the obligation of
an appeals committee to uphold a complaint in relation tothe permanent exclusion of a student from a school if theparent of the student or the student, as the case may be,shows that subsection (1) or (4) of section 24 of the Actof 2000 has not been complied with in relation to thatexclusion.
(4B) In hearing and determining an appeal under this
section an appeals committee shall act in accordance withsuch procedures as may be determined from time to timeby the Minister following consultation with patrons,national associations of parents, recognised school man-agement organisations, recognised trade unions and staffassociations representing teachers, and such other personsas the Minister considers appropriate, and such pro-cedures shall—
(a) provide that the Secretary General may require
one or more of the parties to the appeal to fur-nish to the committee, within a period specifiedin the requirement, such information as theSecretary General specifies in the requirement,
5S.4S.4
6[No. 9.] [2007.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
(b) provide that the Secretary General may stipu-
late, as a condition for the committee proceed-ing to hear and determine the appeal, that arequirement made of a parent or student bythe Secretary General in accordance with pro-cedures under paragraph ( a) has been com-
plied with, and
(c) ensure that—
(i) the parties to the appeal are assisted to
reach agreement on the matters the sub-ject of the appeal where the committee isof the opinion that reaching such agree-ment is practicable in the circumstances,
(ii) hearings are conducted with the minimum
of formality consistent with giving all par-ties a fair hearing,
(iii) the appeal is determined within a period of
30 days (the ‘relevant period’) from—
(I) save where clause (II) applies, the date
of the receipt of the appeal by theSecretary General, or
(II) if a requirement, in accordance with
procedures under paragraph ( a), is
made of any of the parties to theappeal, the date on which the periodspecified in the requirement for fur-nishing the information concernedexpires,
unless the Secretary General extends the rel-
evant period (which the Secretary General has,by virtue of this subparagraph, power to do)where he or she is of opinion that an extensionis necessary in all the circumstances of the case(but the period of that extension may notexceed 14 days).
(4C) An appeals committee may draw such inferences
as it considers appropriate from any failure of a party toan appeal to comply with a requirement made of the partyin accordance with procedures under subsection (4B)( a).
(4D) An appeals committee may refuse to hear, or con-
tinue to hear, an appeal under this section if—
(a) it is of opinion that the appeal is vexatious, friv-
olous, an abuse of process or without substanceor foundation, or
(b) it is satisfied, having regard to the grounds of
appeal and any attempts to facilitate agree-ment between the parties or any subsequentsteps taken by the parties, that in the particularcircumstances the appeal should not be con-sidered further.[2007.] [ No. 9.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
(4E) At the hearing of an appeal against a decision to
which subsection (1) applies, the National EducationalWelfare Board and the National Council for Special Edu-cation may each make such submissions, if any (whetherin writing or orally), as it considers appropriate to theappeals committee.”,
(c) in subsection (7)( b), by inserting “, within such period (if
any) as may be specified by the Secretary General in thatnotice,” after “and the board shall”, and
(d) by adding the following subsections:
“(13) Notwithstanding subparagraph (iii) of subsection
(4B)( c), the Minister may provide by regulations that no
appeal under this section shall be heard during a specifiedperiod in any year, being a period in that year in whichschools are closed; any period that is specified in suchregulations for the time being in force shall not bereckoned in calculating the period referred to in that sub-paragraph (iii) that is applicable to the appeal concerned.
(14) If, in the circumstances of the particular matter, an
issue relating to the refusal of a particular school to enrola student or the exclusion by a particular school of astudent from it would (if this subsection had not beenenacted) be capable of—
(a) being the subject of an appeal under this
section, and
(b) being, in substance, contested in an appeal
under section 10 of the Education for Personswith Special Educational Needs Act 2004,
then, in those circumstances, an appeal may be made by a
person under one or other of those sections (being which-ever of them the person proposing to appeal opts for) butnot both of those sections.
(15) For the purposes of the application of subsection
(14), but only for those purposes, a student and his or herparents shall be treated as the one person; for the purposesof that subsection and this subsection, subsection (12)applies in relation to the construction of ‘student’.”.
5.—Section 53 of the Act of 1998 is amended by inserting “or the
State Examinations Commission” after “Minister”.
6.—The Act of 2000 is amended—
(a) in section 26, by deleting—
(i) in subsection (1), “paragraph ( a)o r( c) of”, and
(ii) subsection (2),
and
(b) in section 27(1), by deleting “paragraph ( a)o r( c) of”.
7S.4
Amendment of
section 53 of Act of1998.
Amendment of Act
of 2000.Transfer of lands
from City of CorkVocationalEducationCommittee.
8[No. 9.] [2007.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
7.—(1) In this section—
“Commissioners” means the Commissioners of Public Works in
Ireland;
“Committee” means the City of Cork Vocational Education
Committee;
“relevant day specified in the order” means—
(a) if a single day is specified in an order under this section
on which all the land, property, rights, powers and privil-eges to which the order relates shall vest in the Commis-sioners, that day,
(b) if different days are specified in an order under this section
on which different parts or elements of the land, prop-erty, rights, powers or privileges to which the orderrelates shall vest in the Commissioners, the particular dayso specified in relation to the part or element concerned.
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , the Minister may by order, with the
consent of the Committee and the Minister for Finance, provide—
(a) that the lands described in the Table to this section
together with all property relating thereto whether realor personal (including choses-in-action), and
(b) that all rights, powers and privileges relating to or connec-
ted with such lands or property,
which, in each case, stands vested in the Committee immediately
before the relevant day specified in the order shall, on that day, vestin the Commissioners.
(3) An order under this section may specify different days in
relation to which different parts or elements of the lands, property,rights, powers or privileges to which the order relates shall vest inthe Commissioners.
(4) The Minister shall not make an order under this section unless
the Minister is satisfied that the use by the Committee of the landand property to which the order will, if made, relate is not necessaryfor the performance by the Committee of its functions.
(5) An order under this section shall operate to vest in the Com-
missioners on the relevant day specified in the order—
(a) in so far as the order relates to lands or other real property
referred to in subsection (2) , those lands or other such
property for all the estate or interest for which immedi-ately before that day those lands or other property werevested in the Committee, but subject to all trusts andequities affecting those lands or other property subsistingand capable of being performed,
(b) in so far as the order relates to personal property
(including choses-in-action) referred to in subsection (2) ,
that property without any assignment, but subject, wherenecessary, to transfer in the books of any bank, corpor-ation or company, and[2007.] [ No. 9.] Education (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2007 .
(c) in so far as the order relates to rights, powers and privil-
eges referred to in subsection (2) , those rights, powers
and privileges.
(6) An order under this section may contain such incidental, con-
sequential, transitional or supplementary provisions as may appearto the Minister to be necessary or proper for the purpose of, or inconsequence of, or to give full effect to, a transfer of the lands, prop-erty, rights, powers and privileges effected by the order.
(7) A provision of any enactment, apart from this Act, shall
neither be construed as preventing, nor shall it operate to prevent,a transfer of land, property or any other thing by an order underthis section.
TABLE
Crawford Art Gallery, Emmet Place in the City of Cork
8.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.
9.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Education (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2007.
(2) The Education Acts 1878 to 2001 and sections 2 to5may be
cited together as the Education Acts 1878 to 2007.
(3) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or different provisions.
9S.7
Expenses.
Short title,
collective citationandcommencement.