————————
Number 12of2007
————————
CARBON FUND ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definitions.
2. Carbon Fund.3. Payments into Carbon Fund.4. Carbon Fund not to be used for any other purpose.5. Accounts of Carbon Fund and audit.6. Reports and information to Minister.7. Accountability of Agency.8. Directions to Agency.9. Revoking functions of Agency.
10. Short title.
————————
12[No. 12.] [2007.] Carbon Fund Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 8
Finance Act 1993 1993, No. 13————————
Number 12of2007
CARBON FUND ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
FUND TO BE KNOWN AS THE CARBON FUND TO BEUTILISED FOR THE ACQUISITION OF KYOTO UNITSAND OTHER SUCH INSTRUMENTS OR ASSETS BY THESTATE TO MEET INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGEOBLIGATIONS UNDER THE UNITED NATIONSFRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGEDONE AT NEW YORK ON 9TH MAY 1992 AND THEKYOTO PROTOCOL TO THE CONVENTION DONE ATKYOTO ON 11TH DECEMBER 1997, TO DESIGNATETHE NATIONAL TREASURY MANAGEMENT AGENCYAS THE AGENT FOR THE ACQUISITION, INCLUDINGON FOOT OF EXISTING OR FUTURE AGREEMENTS TOWHICH THE STATE IS OR BECOMES BOUND, OFKYOTO UNITS AND SUCH OTHER INSTRUMENTS ORASSETS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE, TO PROVIDE FORTHE MAKING AVAILABLE OF FINANCIALRESOURCES TO AND THE USE AND MANAGEMENTOF THE CARBON FUND, TO PROVIDE FOR CONSE-QUENTIAL AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING LEGIS-LATION AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[7th April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Agency” means National Treasury Management Agency;
“Carbon Fund” has the meaning assigned to it by section 2 ;
“Convention” means United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change done at New York on 9th May 1992;
“Minister” means Minister for the Environment, Heritage and
Local Government;
“Kyoto Protocol” means Kyoto Protocol to the Convention done at
Kyoto on 11th December 1997;
“Kyoto Unit” means a unit, equivalent to one metric tonne of carbon
dioxide, issued pursuant to the Kyoto Protocol and the decisionsadopted pursuant to the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol.
2.—(1) The Minister shall, with the consent of the Minister for
Finance, establish a fund to be known as and in this Act referred toas the Carbon Fund for the purpose, subject to subsection (8) ,o f
acquiring on behalf of the State, including on foot of existing or
3Definitions.
Carbon Fund.S.2
Payments into
Carbon Fund.
4[No. 12.] [2007.] Carbon Fund Act 2007 .
future agreements to which the State is or becomes bound, Kyoto
Units and any other such instruments or assets in accordance withthe provisions of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, and forany purpose associated with or incidental to the fulfilment of thatfunction.
(2) The Minister for Finance shall, when he or she considers it
appropriate, establish a bank account at the Central Bank and Finan-cial Services Authority of Ireland to be known as the Carbon FundEuro Bank Account, and, subject to subsection (6) , all moneys
received for credit of and disbursed from the Carbon Fund shallrespectively be paid into and out of that account.
(3) The Minister shall manage and control the Carbon Fund in
accordance with this Act and has all powers necessary for or inciden-tal to the performance by him or her of such functions.
(4) Subject to sections 8 and 9 , the management of the Carbon
Fund is delegated to the Agency. The Agency has all the powers thatare necessary for or incidental to the performance of its function inmanaging the Carbon Fund.
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (4) , the Minister may give direc-
tions to the Agency in relation to acquisition of Kyoto Units or anyother instruments or assets acquired under subsection (1) , or any
matter associated with or incidental to such acquisition.
(6) The Agency, in connection with the performance of the func-
tions delegated to it under subsection (4) , may—
(a) engage in transactions of a normal banking nature in
respect of the management of the Carbon Fund and may,for such purposes, issue such funds from the CarbonFund as are necessary,
(b) pay into any foreign currency clearing account created by
the Minister for Finance under section 139 of the FinanceAct 1993 the proceeds of any transaction denominated ina currency other than the currency of the State, and
(c) apply any amounts standing to the credit of any foreign
currency clearing account towards the discharging of pay-ment obligations arising under any transaction referredto in paragraph (a) .
(7) The expenses and other costs incurred by the Agency in con-
nection with or arising out of any transactions engaged in by theAgency under subsection (6)(a) shall be charged on the Carbon
Fund.
(8) The Agency may, with the consent of the Minister and the
Minister for Finance and on such terms as they may specify, disposeof Kyoto Units or any other instruments or assets acquired undersubsection (1) , and, subject to subsection (6) , any proceeds of any
such disposal shall be paid into the Carbon Fund.
(9) Any surplus arising in the Carbon Fund shall be paid into the
Central Fund from time to time as the Agency considers appropriate.
3.—(1) The Minister for Finance may, for the purpose of section
2, advance moneys to the Carbon Fund from the Central Fund.[2007.] [ No. 12.] Carbon Fund Act 2007 .
(2) Subject to sections 8 and 9,the function of the Minister for
Finance under subsection (1) is delegated to the Agency.
(3) The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for Fin-
ance, having regard to the obligations of the State under the Conven-tion and the Kyoto Protocol, pay into the Carbon Fund in the finan-cial year 2006 and each subsequent financial year, out of moneysprovided by the Oireachtas, such amounts as he or she determines.
(4) Any advances from the Central Fund to the Carbon Fund
under subsection (1) shall, as soon as practicable, be reimbursed by
payments through the Carbon Fund under subsection (3) .
4.—Moneys standing to the credit of the Carbon Fund shall not
be used for any purposes other than those specified in this Act.
5.—(1) The Agency shall—
(a) keep, in such form as may be approved by the Minister,
with the consent of the Minister for Finance, all properand usual accounts in relation to the performance by itof the functions delegated or granted to it under thisAct, and
(b) whenever requested to do so by the Minister, give to him
or her either or both such accounts and such informationin relation to such accounts as he or she may specify.
(2) Accounts kept under this section, as signed by the Chief
Executive (who shall be the accountable person in relation to theaccounts of the Carbon Fund), shall be submitted, as soon as maybe, but not later than 4 months after the end of the financial year ofthe Agency to which they relate, by the Agency to the Comptrollerand Auditor General for audit. A copy of the accounts as so audited,together with a copy of the report by the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral on those accounts, shall be presented to the Minister as soonas may be thereafter. The Minister shall cause a copy of those aud-ited accounts and that report to be laid before each House of theOireachtas.
6.—(1) As soon as may be, but not later than 6 months after the
end of each financial year of the Agency, the Agency shall make areport to the Minister of its activities in relation to the performanceduring the year concerned of the functions delegated to it under thisAct, and the Minister shall cause copies of the report to be laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas.
(2) The Agency shall supply the Minister with such information
as he or she may from time to time request relating to the perform-ance by the Agency of the functions delegated to it under this Act.
(3) The Agency shall, when requested by the Minister, make
recommendations to the Minister in relation to the functions perfor-med by the Agency under this Act.
7.—(1) The Chief Executive of the Agency shall, in relation to
the functions performed by the Agency under this Act, wheneverrequired by the Committee of Public Accounts, give evidence to thatCommittee on—
5S.3
Carbon Fund not to
be used for anyother purpose.
Accounts of Carbon
Fund and audit.
Reports and
information toMinister.
Accountability of
Agency.S.7
Directions to
Agency.
Revoking functions
of Agency.
Short title.
6[No. 12.] [2007.] Carbon Fund Act 2007 .
(a) the regularity and propriety of the transactions recorded
or required to be recorded in any book or other record ofaccount subject to audit by the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral that the Chief Executive is required by or understatute to prepare,
(b) the economy and efficiency of the Agency in the use of
resources,
(c) the systems, procedures and practices employed by the
Agency for the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness ofits operations under this Act, and
(d) any matter affecting the Agency referred to in a special
report of the Comptroller and Auditor General undersection 11(2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General(Amendment) Act 1993 or in any other report of theComptroller and Auditor General (in so far as it relatesto a matter specified in paragraph (a) ,(b)or(c)) that is
laid before Da ´il E´ireann.
(2) When performing duties under this section, the Chief Execu-
tive of the Agency shall not question or express an opinion on themerits of any policy of the Government or a Minister of the Govern-ment or on the merits of the objectives of such a policy.
(3) In this section “Committee of Public Accounts” means the
Committee of Da ´il E´ireann established under the Standing Orders
of Da ´il E´ireann to examine and report to Da ´il E´ireann on the appro-
priation accounts and reports of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral.
8.—The Minister may, following consultation with the Minister for
Finance, give directions or guidelines to the Agency in relation tothe performance by it of the functions delegated or granted to itunder this Act. The Agency shall comply with any such directionsand perform those functions in accordance with any such guidelines.
9.—Where the Minister feels it is appropriate in the circumstances,
and following consultation with the Minister for Finance, the Mini-ster may, by order, revoke some or all of the functions delegated tothe Agency under this Act.
10.—This Act may be cited as the Carbon Fund Act 2007.