————————
Number 15of2009
————————
NURSING HOMES SUPPORT SCHEME ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title.
2. Commencement.3. Interpretation.4. Couples.
PART 2
Establishment of Scheme and Application for State Support
5. Establishment of Scheme.
6. Persons who may apply for State support under Scheme.7. Care needs assessment.8. Review of care needs assessment.9. Application for State support.
10. Financial assessment of means.11. Determination of application for State support.12. Provision of State support and ancillary State support.13. Provision of State support (transitional care services).14. Calculation of amount of State support.
12[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
PART 3
Ancillary State Support
15. Interpretation ( Part 3 ).
16. Ancillary State support.17. Ancillary State support to be charge against land.18. Payment of ancillary State support.19. Repayment of monies advanced by way of ancillary State
support.
20. Repayment of monies advanced by way of ancillary State
support where deferral of occurrence of relevantevent applies.
PART 4
Care Representative
21. Appointment of care representative in case of person not
having full capacity.
22. Amendment of Second Schedule to Courts and Court
Officers Act 1995.
PART 5
Notification of specified matters
23. Notification of death or discharge of person provided with
financial support under Scheme.
24. Notification of material change in circumstances of person
provided with financial support.
25. Notification of change in circumstances of connected per-
sons, etc.
26. Collection of monies advanced by way of ancillary State
support.
27. Submission of schedule of assets to Executive where
deceased person received financial support underScheme.
28. Discharge of orders made under section 17 .
PART 6
Joint ownership
29. Joint ownership.
PART 7
Reviews and Appeals
30. Reviews.31. Appeals regarding hardship in certain cases.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
32. Appeals against certain decisions of Executive.
PART 8
Charges in Respect of Care Services
33. Charges in respect of care services.34. Amendment of Health Act 1970.
PART 9
Miscellaneous
35. Guidelines.36. Regulations.37. Amendment of Consumer Credit Act 1995.38. Amendment of section 7A of Health (Nursing Homes) Act
1990.
39. Transitional provisions.40. Designation by Minister of suitable person to negotiate
agreements.
41. Amendment of National Treatment Purchase Fund Board
(Establishment) Order 2004.
42. Non-disclosure and misstatement relating to financial
assessments.
43. Contracts for necessaries.44. Power of Executive to specify forms.45. Records.46. Relief of undue hardship.47. Authority of person to act on behalf of another person.48. Amendment of Taxes Consolidation Act 1997.
SCHEDULE 1
Assessment of Means
SCHEDULE 2
Adjustment and Manner of Calculation of Amounts
Repayable in Respect of Ancillary State Support
————————
34[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
Acts Referred to
Capital Acquisitions Tax Consolidation Act 2003 2003, No. 1
Consumer Credit Act 1995 1995, No. 24Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911Courts and Court Officers Act 1995 1995, No. 31Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003Family Home Protection Act 1976 1976, No. 27Finance Act 2002 2002, No. 5Health (Amendment) Act 1996 1996, No. 15Health (Amendment) Act 2005 2005, No. 3Health (Nursing Homes) (Amendment) Act 2007 2007, No. 1Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 1990, No. 23Health Act 1947 1947, No. 28Health Act 1970 1970, No. 1Health Act 2004 2004, No. 42Health Act 2007 2007, No. 23Medical Practitioners Act 2007 2007, No. 25Mental Health Acts 1945 to 2001National Archives Act 1986 1986, No. 11Nurses Act 1985 1985, No. 18Registration of Title Act 1964 1964, No. 16Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 2005, No. 26Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39————————
Number 15of2009
————————
NURSING HOMES SUPPORT SCHEME ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
SCHEME TO BE KNOWN AS THE NURSING HOMESSUPPORT SCHEME UNDER WHICH FINANCIAL SUP-PORT MAY BE MADE AVAILABLE TO PERSONS INRESPECT OF LONG-TERM RESIDENTIAL CARESERVICES OUT OF RESOURCES ALLOCATED TO THEHEALTH SERVICE EXECUTIVE FOR THE PURPOSESOF THE SCHEME, TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMEND-MENT OF THE HEALTH ACT 1970, TO PROVIDE FORTHE AMENDMENT OF THE HEALTH (NURSINGHOMES) ACT 1990, TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMEND-MENT OF THE COURTS AND COURT OFFICERS ACT1995, TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THENATIONAL TREATMENT PURCHASE FUND BOARD(ESTABLISHMENT) ORDER 2004 AND TO PROVIDEFOR RELATED MATTERS.
[1st July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—This Act may be cited as the Nursing Homes Support Scheme
Act 2009.
2.—This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision, and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes and different provisions.
3.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
“ancillary State support” has the meaning assigned to it by section 15 ;
“application for State support” means an application for State sup-
port under section 9(1) ;
5Short title.
Commencement.
Interpretation.Pt.1 S.3
6[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
“approved nursing home”—
(a) means, before the date on which section 104 of the Health
Act 2007 is commenced in so far as that section relatesto the repeal of those sections of the Health (NursingHomes) Act 1990 referred to in Part 1 of Schedule 1 tothe Health Act 2007, a nursing home—
(i) which is registered under the Health (Nursing
Homes) Act 1990,
(ii) in respect of which there is in force an agreement in
writing, between the proprietor of the nursing homeand a designated person, as to the maximum amountthat will be charged for the provision in the nursinghome of such care services as are specified in theagreement which fall within paragraph (a)(ii) of the
definition of “long-term residential care services” (orclasses of such care services) to those persons whoare maintained in the nursing home and who havemade an application for State support, and
(iii) in respect of the registered proprietor of which a cer-
tificate under section 1095 (as substituted by section127( b) of the Finance Act 2002) of the Taxes Con-
solidation Act 1997 is in force,
(b) means, on and after the date referred to in paragraph (a) ,
a nursing home—
(i) which is registered under the Health Act 2007 as a
designated centre within the meaning of that Act orin respect of which a person is carrying on the busi-ness of the nursing home pursuant to section 69(2),(3) and (4) of that Act,
(ii) in respect of which there is in force an agreement in
writing, between the proprietor of the nursing homeand a designated person, as to the maximum amountthat will be charged for the provision in the nursinghome of such care services as are specified in theagreement which fall within paragraph (a)(ii) of the
definition of “long-term residential care services” (orclasses of such care services) to those persons whoare maintained in the nursing home and who havemade an application for State support, and
(iii) in respect of the registered provider of which a certifi-
cate under section 1095 (as substituted by section127( b) of the Finance Act 2002) of the Taxes Con-
solidation Act 1997 is in force;
“approved nursing home agreement”, in relation to care services pro-
vided by an approved nursing home, means the agreement referredto in paragraph (a)(ii) or(b)(ii) of the definition of “approved nurs-
ing home” which is in force in respect of that nursing home;
“assessed weekly means” has the same meaning as it has in
Schedule 1 ;
“authorised person” has the same meaning as it has in section 17 ;[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
“care needs assessment”, in relation to a person, means an assess-
ment of the care needs of the person carried out under section 7 ;
“care needs assessment report”, in relation to a person, means the
report under section 7(4) in respect of the care needs assessment of
the person;
“care representative” means a person appointed to be a care rep-
resentative pursuant to section 21 ;
“care services” means long-term residential care services;“charge” includes a mortgage;“child” includes a step-child;“cost”—
(a) in relation to care services provided by the Executive,
means the cost, determined by the Executive in accord-ance with section 33(3) and (4), of such care services,
(b) in relation to care services provided on behalf of the
Executive, means the cost of such care services asreferred to in section 33(5) ,
(c) in relation to care services provided by an approved nurs-
ing home, means the amount charged by the proprietorof that nursing home as respects the provision of careservices, being an amount not greater than the maximumamount specified in relation to the provision of careservices specified in the approved nursing home agree-ment entered into by the proprietor of that nursing home;
“couple” has the meaning assigned to it by section 4 ;
“deferred relevant event” has the meaning assigned to it by section
20;
“designated person” means the person designated under section 40 ;
“estimated market value” has the meaning assigned to it by
Schedule 1 ;
“Executive” means the Health Service Executive;“financial assessment” means an assessment carried out under
section 10 ;
“financial assessment report” means the report prepared in accord-
ance with section 10 ;
“financial support” means—
(a) State support,
(b) ancillary State support, or
(c) where applicable, both State support and ancillary State
support;
“information” includes—
7Pt.1 S.3Pt.1 S.3
8[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(a) documents,
(b) without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (a) ,
instruments, certificates and statutory declarations, and
(c) duplicates of any form;
“long-term residential care services”—
(a) subject to paragraph (b) , means—
(i) maintenance, health or personal care services, or any
combination thereof, provided by or on behalf of theExecutive to a person—
(I) whilst the person resides in and is maintained in
a facility—
(A) that is publicly designated in writing by the
Executive as a facility predominantly forthe care of older people, which designationshall, subject to section 33(2) , specify the
health or personal care services to be pro-vided at that facility, and
(B) in which nursing care is provided on the
basis that at no time should there be lessthan one registered nurse present in thefacility who is available to provide nursingcare for the persons maintained in thefacility, and
(II) subject to subsection (2) , for—
(A) a period of not less than 30 consecutive
days, or
(B) periods in the aggregate amounting to not
less than 30 days within a period of 12 con-secutive months, or
(ii) maintenance, health or personal care services, or any
combination thereof, provided to a person whilst theperson resides in and is maintained in an approvednursing home—
(I) in which nursing care is provided on the basis that
at no time should there be less than one regis-tered nurse present in the approved nursinghome who is available to provide nursing carefor the persons maintained in the approvednursing home, and
(II) subject to subsection (2) , for—
(A) a period of not less than 30 consecutive
days, or
(B) periods in the aggregate amounting to not
less than 30 days within a period of 12 con-secutive months,
(b) does not include—[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(i) medically acute care and treatment in an acute
hospital,
(ii) respite care,
(iii) rehabilitative care for—
(I) a period of less than 12 consecutive months, or
(II) periods in the aggregate amounting to less than
12 months within a period of 24 consecutivemonths, or
(iv) out-patient services made available pursuant to
section 56 of the Health Act 1970;
“Minister” means the Minister for Health and Children;“mortgage” includes a charge;“nursing home” has the meaning assigned to it by section 2 of the
Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 and includes an institutionreferred to in section 2(1)( h) of that Act;
“partner”, in relation to a person who is a member of a couple,
means the person who is the other member of the couple;
“principal residence” has the meaning assigned to it by Schedule 1 ;
“proprietor”—
(a) in relation to a facility referred to in paragraph (a)(i) of
the definition of “long-term residential care services”,means the person who has agreed in writing with theExecutive to be the proprietor of the facility for the pur-poses of the performance of the functions imposed underthis Act on the proprietor of such a facility,
(b) in relation to an approved nursing home, means the regis-
tered proprietor, within the meaning of section 1 of theHealth (Nursing Homes) Act 1990, of the nursing home;
“registered medical practitioner” means a registered medical prac-
titioner within the meaning of the Medical Practitioners Act 2007;
“registered nurse” means a person whose name is entered in the
register of nurses maintained under section 27 of the Nurses Act1985;
“relative”, in relation to a person, means a parent, step-parent, child,
grandchild, brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, uncle, aunt,nephew or niece of the person;
“relevant assets” has the meaning assigned to it by Schedule 1 ;
“relevant event” has the meaning assigned to it by section 19 ;
“relevant facility” means a facility which falls within paragraph
(a)(i)(I) of the definition of “long-term residential care services”;
“relevant subvention” has the meaning assigned to it by section 7
(inserted by section 3 of the Health (Nursing Homes) (Amendment)Act 2007) of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990;
9Pt.1 S.3Pt.1 S.3
Couples.
10[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
“Scheme” means the Nursing Homes Support Scheme established
under section 5 ;
“social insurance contribution” means any contribution which falls
within section 6(1)( a), (b), (c)o r( d) of the Social Welfare Consoli-
dation Act 2005;
“specified”, in relation to a form, means a form specified under
section 44 ;
“State support” means a payment made by the Executive in accord-
ance with the Scheme following an application for such support toassist a person in meeting the cost of care services;
“suitable”, in relation to a person (who may be an employee of the
Executive) and a function to be performed under this Act, meansthat, in the opinion of the Executive, the person has the necessaryqualifications, training or experience, or combination thereof, to per-form that function;
“transfer”, in relation to an asset or income, means the transfer by
sale or gift of that asset or income and references to “transferred”shall be construed accordingly;
“transferred asset” has the meaning assigned to it by Schedule 1 ;
“transferred income” has the meaning assigned to it by
Schedule 1 .
(2) Where the Executive is satisfied that a person who is or is to
be provided with care services is unlikely to ever cease to requirecare services during the person’s lifetime, then paragraph (a)(i)(II)
or(a)(ii)(II) , as the case may be, of the definition of “long-term
residential care services” shall not apply in the case of that person.
4.—(1) In this Act, “couple” means—
(a) two persons married to each other,
(b) a man and woman who are not married to each other but
are cohabiting as husband and wife, or
(c) two persons of the same sex who are cohabiting in
domestic circumstances comparable to that of a man andwoman who are not married to each other but arecohabiting as husband and wife,
who are habitually living together at the date of the making of an
application for State support by either or both of them or at the dateof the commencement of the provision of care services to either orboth of them.
(2) For the purposes of this section—
(a) a couple referred to in paragraph (b) ofsubsection (1) shall
not be considered as habitually living together unless theyhave been cohabiting in the manner referred to in thatparagraph,
(b) a couple referred to in paragraph (c) ofsubsection (1) shall
not be considered as habitually living together unless they[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
have been cohabiting in the manner referred to in that
paragraph,
for a period of not less than 3 years immediately preceding the date
of the making of an application for State support by either or bothof them or at the date of the commencement of the provision of careservices to either or both of them.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) , a person shall be considered
as habitually living together with the other member of the couplewhere—
(a) either of them resides in or enters a relevant facility or
approved nursing home for the purposes of being pro-vided with care services,
(b) both of them reside in or enter a relevant facility or
approved nursing home for the purposes of being pro-vided with care services,
(c) either of them resides in or enters an institution (of what-
ever kind) for purposes related to—
(i) a physical or mental condition of the person con-
cerned, or
(ii) the imprisonment, or the taking into lawful custody,
of the person concerned, or
(d) both of them reside in or enter an institution (of whatever
kind) for purposes related to—
(i) a physical or mental condition of the person con-
cerned, or
(ii) the imprisonment, or the taking into lawful custody,
of the person concerned.
PART 2
Establishment of Scheme and Application for State Support
5.—(1) On the coming into operation of this section there is estab-
lished a scheme to be known as the Nursing Homes Support Schemeto be operated under and in accordance with this Act.
(2) The Scheme is established for the purpose of giving financial
support under this Act in respect of care services in accordance withthis Act out of the resources allocated to the Scheme in each year inaccordance with subsection (4) and shall consist of the provision of
financial support in respect of care services for the purposes of andin accordance with the provisions of this Act and any guidelinesissued under section 35 .
(3) It shall be a function of the Executive to operate and adminis-
ter the Scheme.
(4) In the financial year 2009 and in each subsequent financial
year the Executive shall, out of such monies as are available to it forthat financial year from monies provided by the Oireachtas, allocatesuch amount as the Minister determines, with the consent of the
11Pt.1 S.4
Establishment of
Scheme.Pt.2 S.5
Persons who may
apply for Statesupport underScheme.
Care needs
assessment.
12[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
Minister for Finance, for the provision of financial support under this
Scheme in that financial year.
(5) The Scheme established by this Act shall be operated subject
to the principles that—
(a) applicants who are determined by the Executive to need
care services in accordance with section 7(8) shall be
informed of the names and addresses of all relevant facili-ties and approved nursing homes, and
(b) subject to section 12(2) and subject to the availability of a
long-term residential care bed, the applicant may selectthe relevant facility or approved nursing home in whichto receive care services.
6.—(1) This section applies to a person ordinarily resident in the
State—
(a) in respect of whom an application for a care needs assess-
ment has been made,
(b) in respect of whom the Executive has determined under
section 7(8)(a) that the person needs care services,
(c) who, on the coming into operation of this paragraph, is
being provided with care services by the Executive or onbehalf of the Executive, or
(d) who, on the coming into operation of this paragraph, is
being provided with care services by an approved nurs-ing home.
(2) A person may not make an application for, or receive, State
support unless the person is a person to whom this section applies.
7.—(1) ( a) A person ordinarily resident in the State, other than a
person referred to in paragraph (c) or(d)ofsubsection
(1)ofsection 6 , who wishes to make an application for
State support shall apply for a care needs assessment.
(b) A person ordinarily resident in the State, who is a person
referred to in paragraph (c) or(d)ofsubsection (1) of
section 6 , who wishes to make an application for State
support may apply for a care needs assessment.
(2) Where it appears to a specified person that—
(a) a person ordinarily resident in the State may need care
services, and
(b) that person, by reason of ill-health, a physical disability or
a mental condition, is unable to make an application fora care needs assessment,
the specified person may apply to the Executive for a care needs
assessment on behalf of that person.
(3) An application for a care needs assessment shall be made to
the Executive in the specified form.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(4) Upon receipt of an application for a care needs assessment,
the Executive shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make arrange-ments for a care needs assessment to be carried out and a report onthat assessment to be provided to the Executive.
(5) The assessment referred to in subsection (4) shall be carried
out by persons (who may be employees of the Executive) who, inthe opinion of the Executive, are suitably qualified to make thatassessment and prepare a report in relation to the assessment.
(6) A care needs assessment of a person shall comprise an eval-
uation of—
(a) the person’s ability to carry out the activities of daily liv-
ing, including—
(i) the cognitive ability,
(ii) the extent of orientation,
(iii) the degree of mobility,
(iv) the ability to dress unaided,
(v) the ability to feed unaided,
(vi) the ability to communicate,
(vii) the ability to bathe unaided, and
(viii) the degree of continence,
of the person,
(b) the family and community support that is available to the
person,
(c) the medical, health and personal social services being pro-
vided to or available to the person both at the time ofthe carrying out of the assessment and generally,
(d) any other matter that affects the person’s ability to care
for himself or herself, and
(e) the likelihood of a material alteration in the circumstances
referred to in paragraphs (a) to(d)during the lifetime of
the person.
(7) A care needs assessment may include an examination of the
person concerned by, as appropriate, a registered medical prac-titioner, a registered nurse, an occupational therapist or a charteredphysiotherapist, or any combination thereof.
(8) Where the Executive receives a care needs assessment report
in respect of a person, it shall, after considering the report as soonas practicable after its receipt, make a determination—
(a) that the person needs care services, or
(b) that the person does not need care services,
as it thinks appropriate in the circumstances of the case, and where
the Executive determines that the person needs care services, the
13Pt.2 S.7Pt.2 S.7
Review of care
needs assessment.
14[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
Executive may also make a determination that it is unlikely that the
person will ever cease to require care services during the person’slifetime.
(9) The Executive shall, not later than 10 working days after mak-
ing a determination under subsection (8) , give notice in writing of
the decision—
(a) to the person, and
(b) in the case of an application made under subsection (2), to
the specified person.
(10) The notification shall be accompanied by—
(a) a copy of the care needs assessment report in respect of
the determination, and
(b) the reasons for the determination.
(11) Where a care needs assessment is carried out, this shall not
be construed as meaning that the Executive will provide or willarrange for the provision of any service identified in the assessmentas being appropriate to meet the needs of the person or that theExecutive has an obligation to provide or arrange for the provisionof any such service.
(12) Subject to subsection (11) , the content of a care needs assess-
ment report may be used by the Executive for the purposes of con-sidering what other health services or personal social services maybe appropriate for the person.
(13) The content of a care needs assessment report may be pro-
vided to a relevant facility or approved nursing home with the priorconsent of the person who is the subject of the report.
(14) In this section “specified person” has the same meaning as it
has in section 47 .
(15) In respect of any application for a care needs assessment by a
specified person, the Executive may refuse to deal with the specifiedperson if the Executive is not satisfied that such specified person isacting in the best interests of the person.
8.—Where the determination of the Executive under section 7(8)
is that a person does not need care services, that person or a specifiedperson may—
(a) subject to paragraph (b) , not earlier than 6 months after
the date on which that determination was made, make afurther application under that section for a care needsassessment,
(b) before the expiration of 6 months after the date on which
that determination was made, make a further applicationunder that section for a care needs assessment if—
(i) the person satisfies the Executive that, since the per-
son’s last care needs assessment, there has been amaterial change in the person’s health or circum-stances which warrants the application being made,or[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(ii) the application is accompanied by a certificate in the
specified form—
(I) issued by a registered medical practitioner who
has—
(A) seen the person’s most recent care needs
assessment report, and
(B) examined the person since the person’s most
recent care needs assessment,
(II) stating—
(A) the date of the examination, and
(B) that, in the opinion of the practitioner, there
has been a material change in the person’shealth or circumstances which warrants theapplication being made, and
(III) signed by the practitioner.
9.—(1) A person to whom section 6 applies may make an appli-
cation to the Executive in the specified form for State support underthe Scheme.
(2) It shall be a condition of every application for State support
that the applicant, and in the case where the applicant is a memberof a couple, the applicant and his or her partner, shall furnish allinformation which the Executive may request in connection with theconsideration of the application.
(3) The Executive may refuse to consider or further consider an
application for State support if—
(a) the application does not comply with subsection (1) ,o r
(b) the applicant or his or her partner fails to provide the
Executive with such information as may be requested bythe application form or such additional information asthe Executive may reasonably require to enable it todetermine the application.
(4) Where the Executive refuses under subsection (3) to consider
or further consider an application for State support, it shall, not laterthan 10 working days after the refusal, give the applicant notice inwriting of the decision and the reasons for the decision.
(5) Any person who knowingly, or recklessly, gives the Executive
information which is false or misleading in a material particular in,with, or in connection with, an application for State support is guiltyof an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine notexceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months
or both.
10.—(1) Where the Executive receives an application for State
support, the Executive shall make arrangements for a financialassessment of the person to be made by a suitable person who shallprepare and furnish a report on such assessment to the Executive.
15Pt.2 S.8
Application for
State support.
Financial
assessment ofmeans.Pt.2 S.10
Determination of
application for Statesupport.
16[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(2) The financial assessment shall be carried out—
(a) in the case of a person who is not a member of a couple,
in accordance with the provisions of Parts 1 and 3of
Schedule 1 , and
(b) in the case of a person who is a member of a couple, in
accordance with the provisions of Parts 2 and 3ofSched-
ule 1.
(3) ( a) The arrangements referred to in subsection (1) may
include requests for information from, and interviewswith, the person concerned, the person’s partner or anyrepresentative (whether appointed under section 21 or
otherwise) of the person.
(b) The Executive and the suitable person concerned may
request, receive and consider records and informationrelating to the person to whom the application relatesand his or her partner whether received pursuant tosection 45 or otherwise.
(4) Where the Executive wishes to establish the estimated market
value of any item, it may ascertain such value in such manner andby such means as it thinks appropriate and may authorise a suitableperson to, if appropriate, inspect the item and report to it the valueof the item for the purposes of this Act.
(5) Where the Executive authorises a valuation under subsection
(4),the costs of the valuation shall be defrayed by the Executive.
(6) The Executive is not bound by any valuation accompanying
an application for State support.
(7) Where information requested under subsection (3) is not fur-
nished by or on behalf of the person or the person concerned within40 working days from the date of the request, or such longer periodas the Executive permits in any particular case, the suitable personconcerned may report such fact to the Executive which may refuseto consider or further consider the application.
(8) Where the Executive refuses under subsection (7) to consider
or further consider an application, it shall, not later than 10 workingdays after the refusal, give the person notice in writing of the decisionand the reasons for the decision.
11.—(1) Subject to sections 7, 31 and 38 of the Health Act 2004
and section 5 , the Executive shall, having considered the financial
assessment report, determine an application for State support inaccordance with the method of calculation of State support set outinsection 14 .
(2) Where the Executive makes a determination that State sup-
port be paid in respect of a person, the determination may include adirection that, subject to sections 12 to14, such support be payable
on and from—
(a) a date specified by the Executive, or
(b) from the date of the occurrence of an event specified by
the Executive.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(3) Where the Executive makes a determination under subsection
(1), it shall, not later than 10 working days after the determination,
give notice in writing to the person of the decision and the reasonsfor the decision.
(4) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) the Executive shall not make a
determination that State support be paid in respect of aperson referred to in section 6(1)(a) , unless the Executive
has determined under section 7(8)(a) that the person
needs care services.
(b)Paragraph (a) does not apply to a person referred to in
section 6(1)(c) or(d).
(5) Where the Executive has—
(a) made a determination under section 7(8)(a) that a person
needs care services (other than such a determinationmade in respect of a person to whom paragraph (c) or
(d)ofsubsection (1) ofsection 6 applies), and
(b) made a determination that State support be paid in respect
of such person,
the determination referred to in paragraph (b) shall not have effect
prior to the determination referred to in paragraph (a) .
12.—(1) State support shall be provided to a person—
(a) in the case of care services falling within paragraph (a)(i)
of the definition of “long-term residential care services”,by the transfer by the Executive of the appropriateamount of State support to the relevant facility,
(b) in the case of care services falling within paragraph (a)(ii)
of the definition of “long-term residential care services”,by the payment by the Executive of the appropriateamount of State support to the proprietor of theapproved nursing home in which the person resides andis being maintained.
(2) A person applying for State support or making a request for
payment of ancillary State support shall not be entitled to receivesuch support and the Executive shall not be obliged to pay or con-tinue to pay such support unless the care services in relation to whichthe person is seeking payment have been identified by the care needsassessment as being appropriate to the person receiving care services.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a person referred to in section
6(1)(c) or(d).
13.—(1) This section applies where a person was being provided
with transitional care services or care services by an approved nurs-ing home immediately prior to the coming into operation of section
6(1)(d) , and the person concerned has made an application for State
support which application has been determined.
(2) Subject to subsections (3) to(5), nothing in this section shall
of itself operate to require the Executive to provide State support toa person in respect of any period for which the person was provided
17Pt.2 S.11
Provision of State
support andancillary Statesupport.
Provision of State
support(transitional careservices).Pt.2 S.13
Calculation of
amount of Statesupport.
Interpretation ( Part
3).
18[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
with transitional care services or care services before the determi-
nation of the application for State support in respect of that person.
(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), the Executive shall provide
State support to the person in a case to which subsection (1) refers
with effect from the date of the commencement of section 6(1)(d) .
(4) The amount of State support payable by reason of subsection
(3)shall be reduced by the amount of any relevant subvention paid.
(5) Subsection (3) shall not operate to prejudice any obligation of
a person to pay the proprietor of an approved nursing home suchportion of the total weekly cost of transitional care services or careservices otherwise due by that person as is not discharged by thepayment of State support pursuant to this section.
(6) In this section, “transitional care services” means care services
referred to in paragraph (a)(ii) of the definition of “long-term resi-
dential care services” provided by a nursing home, before the com-mencement referred to in paragraph (d) ofsection 6(1) ,a si f para-
graphs (a)(ii) and (b)(ii) of the definition of “approved nursing
home” were deleted.
14.—(1) The amount of State support payable in respect of a per-
son under the Scheme shall be expressed as a weekly amount andshall be determined on the basis of the assessed weekly means deter-mined in accordance with sections 10 and 11and by applying the
equation:
S=T–M
where—
S is the weekly amount of State support,T is the total weekly cost of the care services provided to the
person concerned, and
M is the assessed weekly means of the person.
(2) Where, in the application of the equation specified in subsec-
tion (1) , M is an amount equal to or greater than T, then S shall be
taken to be a nil amount.
PART 3
Ancillary State Support
15.—In this Part—
“chargeable asset” means an asset other than a transferred asset
which is a relevant asset of the person who receives care services orof the partner of such a person, or of both of them, and which—
(a) is an asset which is included in the computation of the
weekly assessed means of a person, and
(b) comprises an interest in land, which land is situated within
the State;[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
“ancillary State support” means monies advanced by the Executive
by way of loan in accordance with this Part.
16.—(1) Ancillary State support may, in accordance with this
section, be paid to or in respect of a person—
(a) who has made an application for State support,
(b) in respect of whom a financial assessment has been carried
out, and
(c) unless the Executive otherwise determines, with effect on
and from, but not prior to, a determination by the Execu-tive that ancillary State support be paid in respect ofsuch person.
(2) Ancillary State support may be paid to or in respect of a per-
son referred to in subsection (1) notwithstanding the fact that State
support is not being paid to or in respect of that person.
(3) ( a) Ancillary State support shall not be paid to or in respect
of a person unless that person (or a care representativeof such person) requests that such ancillary State supportbe paid.
(b) Where the person in respect of whom a request for pay-
ment of ancillary State support is made is a member of acouple, the request for payment of such ancillary Statesupport shall be made by both members of the couple (ora care representative of such person).
(4) The request for payment of ancillary State support shall be
made in the specified form which form shall incorporate an acknowl-edgement that payment of ancillary State support results in thecreation of a charge in favour of the Executive (which by virtue ofthis Act is deemed to be a mortgage made by deed) against theinterest of the person to whom the payment relates and of the part-ner of that person in such land as is specified in the request forpayment of ancillary State support.
(5) ( a) The Executive may make payment of ancillary State sup-
port to or in respect of a person by reference to theassessed weekly value of relevant assets which arechargeable assets.
(b) The Executive may not make payment of ancillary State
support in relation to an asset which is not a chargeableasset comprised in the assessed weekly value of relevantassets of the person concerned.
(6) The amount of ancillary State support which may be advanced
by the Executive to a person shall be computed in accordance withsubsections (5) ,(7)and (12).
(7) ( a) The monies advanced by the Executive by way of ancillary
State support shall be advanced on the basis of weeklyinstalments.
(b) The amount of such weekly instalment in relation to a per-
son shall not exceed that part of the annual assessed rel-evant assets amount relating to the chargeable assets ofthat person divided by 52.
19Pt.3 S.15
Ancillary State
support.Pt.3 S.16
20[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(c) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) and (b), the weekly instal-
ment of ancillary State support may be advanced on suchperiodic basis (not exceeding 2 months) as is specified inwriting by the Minister.
(8) Monies advanced by the Executive by way of ancillary State
support in respect of care services for the person to whom the appli-cation for State support relates and which are advanced in accord-ance with section 18 shall be deemed to have been paid to and for
the benefit of the person who or on whose behalf the request for
such ancillary State support was made or, in the case of a personwho is a member of a couple, to and for the benefit of both membersof the couple.
(9) Where monies are advanced by way of ancillary State support
which by reason of subsection (8) are deemed to have been advanced
to both members of the couple, the liability of the members of thecouple in relation to such advances shall be joint and several.
(10) ( a) Subject to section 42 , it shall be a condition of the payment
of ancillary State support that the monies advanced bythe Executive in respect of such support shall not becomerepayable prior to the occurrence of a relevant event ora deferred relevant event.
(b) Nothing in paragraph (a) shall prevent the voluntary
repayment of monies advanced by the Executive by wayof ancillary State support prior to the occurrence of arelevant event or a deferred relevant event.
(11) The amount repayable in respect of ancillary State support
shall be the aggregate of monies advanced by the Executive by wayof ancillary State support adjusted in accordance with Schedule 2
together with interest, if any, computed in accordance with subsec-
tion (15) .
(12) The amount of a weekly instalment advanced in respect of
ancillary State support or, in a case where a request has been madethat ancillary State support be paid in relation to the same person inrespect of more than one chargeable asset, the aggregate of weeklyinstalments of ancillary State support advanced in relation to thesame person, shall not exceed the amount produced by the appli-cation of the following formula:
T–( A +B+R+S)
where—
T is the total weekly cost of care services applicable to the
person concerned,
A is the assessed weekly income of the person concerned,B is the assessed weekly cash assets of the person concerned,R is the assessed weekly value of the relevant assets of the
person concerned and which are not chargeable assets,and
S is the amount of State support payable in respect of the
person concerned.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(13) Where a relevant asset of a person who receives care services
or of the partner of such a person, or of both of them, ceases to bea chargeable asset for a reason not related to paragraph (a) of the
definition of “chargeable asset” in section 15 —
(a) the person (or the person’s care representative, if any) or,
if applicable, the partner of such person (or the partner’scare representative, if any) shall, as soon as is practicableafter the occurrence of such cesser but, in any case, notlater than 10 working days after the occurrence of suchcesser, give notice in writing to the Executive of thecesser and the date on which it occurred, and
(b) the Executive shall cease to make payments of such part
of ancillary State support which relates to the formerchargeable asset.
(14) The Executive may, following a review of a financial assess-
ment under section 30 , alter the amount of ancillary State support
paid in respect of a person under this section.
(15) Where the Executive makes payments to or on behalf of a
person by way of ancillary State support and, as the case may be, arelevant event or a deferred relevant event occurs, interest shallaccrue on the amount which is the aggregate of the amountsadvanced by way of ancillary State support adjusted in accordancewith Schedule 2 , which interest shall be calculated in accordance with
regulations made under section 36 for the purposes of this subsection.
(16) The Executive shall, not later than 10 working days after
making a determination under this section that an application forpayment of ancillary State support be refused or a determination ofthe amount of ancillary State support to be advanced, give notice inwriting of the decision and the reasons for the decision to each per-son who made the application.
(17) ( a) The Minister may make regulations for the purpose of this
section prescribing circumstances in which a person whois a member of a couple is not required to make a requestfor payment of ancillary State support.
(b) Regulations made under this subsection may provide for—
(i) the making of applications to the Minister for a
decision by the Minister dispensing with the require-ment in that case for the request for ancillary Statesupport to be made by both members of a couple,and
(ii) the matters to be taken into consideration by the
Minister in considering such applications.
(18) The Minister shall not make a decision pursuant to regu-
lations made under subsection (17) dispensing with the requirement
for a request for payment of ancillary State support by one memberof a couple unless he or she is satisfied that the person who wouldotherwise be required to make such request for ancillary State sup-port has no interest in the asset to which the application relates.
(19) The Minister shall not make a decision dispensing with the
requirement for a request for ancillary State support to be made bya person in respect of more than one member of a couple.
21Pt.3 S.16Pt.3
Ancillary State
support to becharge against land.
22[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
17.—(1) In this section—
“authorised person” means a person authorised by the Board of the
Executive for the purposes of—
(a) making orders under subsection (2) ,
(b) transmitting orders by electronic means to the Property
Registration Authority in accordance with subsection
(13),
(c) making an application to the Property Registration Auth-
ority for the cancellation of an entry of a charge on theregister of the property charged where such chargerelates to an order created under this section, and
(d) performing functions which under this Act may be perfor-
med by authorised persons;
“interest in the relevant chargeable asset” means—
(a) the interest of the person in respect of whom ancillary
State support is paid, and
(b) in the case of such a person who is a member of a couple,
the interest of each member of the couple,
in the chargeable asset concerned;“secured amount”, in relation to a chargeable asset, means the aggre-
gate of all amounts advanced by the Executive (whether before orafter the making of an order under subsection (2) ) in respect of a
person by way of ancillary State support adjusted in accordance withSchedule 2 together with interest thereon calculated in accordance
with section 16(15) and which amounts relate to the interest of that
person or of that person’s partner, or of both of them, in that charge-able asset.
(2) ( a) Where the Executive has received a request for payment
of ancillary State support and the Executive is satisfiedthat it is appropriate that payment of such support bemade, the Executive shall make an order in accordancewith this section.
(b) The Executive shall not make a payment in respect of
ancillary State support prior to the making of an orderby the Executive charging the interest in the relevantchargeable asset with the secured amount.
(3) The Board of the Executive may appoint a person or persons
who are employees of the Executive to make orders under subsection
(2)and each such order shall be deemed to have been executed by
the Executive under the seal of the Executive in compliance withparagraph 1 of Schedule 2 of the Health Act 2004.
(4) An order made under subsection (2) shall be deemed to be a
mortgage made by deed within the meaning of the ConveyancingActs 1881 to 1911 in favour of the Executive for a charge of thesecured amount and to have been executed at the time of the makingof the order.
(5) The Executive shall from the date of the making of the order
under subsection (2) —[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(a) be deemed to be a mortgagee of the property for the pur-
poses of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911, and
(b) have, in relation to the charge referred to in subsection (2) ,
all the powers conferred by those Acts on mortgagesmade by deed.
(6) Where the Executive makes an order under subsection (2), it
shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, cause the order to be regis-tered in the Registry of Deeds or the Land Registry, as appropriate.
(7) An order made under subsection (2) affecting an interest in
land which is registered land within the meaning of the Registrationof Title Act 1964 shall be registrable as a burden affecting such landwhether the person named in such order as the owner of the land isor is not registered under that Act as the owner of such land, andthe Property Registration Authority shall on application being madeto it register such order affecting the land concerned.
(8) Any amount paid by way of ancillary State support, whether
or not it is the subject of a mortgage arising by reason of this section,may, without prejudice to any other power in that behalf, be reco-vered by the Executive as a simple contract debt in any court ofcompetent jurisdiction.
(9) For the avoidance of doubt, neither an order made under sub-
section (2) nor a mortgage that arises under it shall be regarded as a
conveyance for the purposes of section 3 of the Family Home Protec-tion Act 1976.
(10) Subject to subsection (11) , notwithstanding any rule of law
or statutory provision, where a mortgage is created by reason of anorder under subsection (2) and registered in the Registry of Deeds
or the Land Registry as appropriate and a subsequent mortgage iscreated in favour of a party other than the Executive, the Executiveis entitled to priority over any subsequent mortgage in respect ofadvances made by the Executive after the date of the subsequentmortgage whether the Executive did or did not have notice of suchsubsequent mortgage.
(11) Subsection (10) does not apply as respects a subsequent mort-
gage where the Executive has consented in writing to such sub-sequent mortgage subject to any conditions specified in that consent.
(12) A person who makes a request for payment of ancillary State
support shall have an obligation to give all reasonable assistance tothe Executive as the Executive may request to facilitate the regis-tration of an order under subsection (2) in the Land Registry or
Registry of Deeds, and the Executive shall not be required to makea payment of ancillary State support where such assistance has notbeen given.
(13) ( a) An order made under subsection (2) shall be in the form
prescribed by regulations made under section 36 , and may
be made—
(i) by an authorised person, and
(ii) in electronic form.
(b) Where an order is made in electronic form under this
section, an authorised person may transmit the order byelectronic means to the Property Registration Authority
23Pt.3 S.17Pt.3 S.17
Payment of
ancillary Statesupport.
Repayment of
monies advanced byway of ancillaryState support.
24[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
for registration in the Land Registry, and the Property
Registration Authority may effect registration of theorder if—
(i) it is lodged by electronic means in a manner approved
by, and
(ii) it complies with the requirements specified by,
the Property Registration Authority.
(14) Where an order under this section made in electronic form
purports to have been made by an authorised person it shall be pre-sumed by the Property Registration Authority that such electronicdocument was made and transmitted by the person by whom it pur-ports to have been made and transmitted.
18.—(1) Where a person and, in the case of a couple, a person
and his or her partner, request payment of ancillary State support,the Executive may make such payment of ancillary State support inrespect of the person concerned—
(a) in the case of care services falling within paragraph (a)(i)
of the definition of “long-term residential care services”,by the transfer by the Executive of the appropriateamount of ancillary State support to the relevant facility,
(b) in the case of care services falling within paragraph (a)(ii)
of the definition of “long-term residential care services”,by the payment by the Executive of the appropriateamount of ancillary State support to the proprietor of theapproved nursing home in which the person resides andis being maintained.
(2) The Executive shall keep records and accounts relating to pay-
ments made under this section.
(3) Where ancillary State support is paid to or on behalf of a
person in relation to different chargeable assets, it shall be recordedby the Executive in a manner which identifies separately the amountof ancillary State support advanced in respect of each chargeableasset.
19.—(1) Subject to subsection (5) , in this section—
“relevant event”, in relation to ancillary State support paid to or in
respect of a particular person, means—
(a) the death of the person concerned who is receiving care
services,
(b) the transfer of any part of the interest in a charged asset
of any person who has requested the payment of ancillaryState Support,
(c) the adjudication as a bankrupt of—
(i) the person in respect of whom the payment of ancil-
lary State support was made, or[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(ii) the person who as partner of the person referred to in
subparagraph (i) also requested payment of ancillary
State support,
(d) a determination by the Executive that information given
to it by or on behalf of a person who has requested pay-ment of the ancillary State support concerned is false ormisleading in a material particular the effect of which is,in the opinion of the Executive, to jeopardise theenforceability of the charge referred to in section 17.
(2) ( a) The Executive shall not make a determination referred to
inparagraph (d) of the definition of “relevant event” in
subsection (1) unless it has given reasonable notice to
each person who requested payment of ancillary Statesupport and given such persons a reasonable opportunityto make representations in relation to the matter.
(b) Representations referred to in paragraph (a) shall, unless
the Executive permits otherwise, be made in writing.
(3) Where a person who has requested payment of ancillary State
support as respects a parcel of land transfers any part of an interestin such land that person shall give notice of such transfer to theExecutive within 10 working days of the date of the transfer.
(4) On the date of the occurrence of a relevant event, the amount
of ancillary State support advanced or in the course of beingadvanced by reference to the asset concerned, adjusted in accordancewith Schedule 2 shall, subject to subsection (5) , become due and
payable.
(5) The occurrence of an event referred to in paragraph (a) of the
definition of “relevant event” in subsection (1) shall not be con-
sidered to be a relevant event in a case where section 20 applies.
20.—(1) This section applies where—
(a) payment of ancillary State support has been made in
respect of a person receiving care services and the assetconcerned is the principal residence of that person,
(b) the death occurs of the person who has been in receipt of
care services and in respect of whom the ancillary Statesupport was paid, and
(c) the conditions specified in subsection (2) are met.
(2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1)(c) are:
(a) that—
(i) the asset concerned is the principal residence of the
surviving partner of the person who has died; and
(ii) such partner (or the partner’s representative) has
made a request in the specified form to the Execu-tive for the application of this section in his or hercase and such request is made not later than 3months after the death concerned (or such longerperiod, not exceeding 6 months after that death, asthe Executive thinks appropriate); or
25Pt.3 S.19
Repayment of
monies advanced byway of ancillaryState support wheredeferral ofoccurrence ofrelevant eventapplies.Pt.3 S.20
26[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(b) the Executive is satisfied that—
(i) the asset concerned is the residence of a connected
person and that such person does not have anyother residence;
(ii) the connected person has ordinarily resided in the
asset concerned for a period of not less than 3 yearsimmediately preceding the date of the making of therequest for payment of ancillary State Support;
(iii) the connected person does not have an interest in any
other residential property; and
(iv) the connected person (or the connected person’s
representative) has made a request in the specifiedform to the Executive for the application of thissection in his or her case and such request is madenot later than 3 months after the death concerned(or such longer period, not exceeding 6 months afterthat death, as the Executive thinks appropriate),
(c) and in each case that every person appearing to the Execu-
tive to have an interest in the asset concerned consents,subject to subsection (9) , to the monies advanced by way
of ancillary State support not becoming repayable untilthe occurrence of a deferred relevant event.
(3) Where the Executive makes a determination that the con-
ditions specified in subsection (2) have been met, the Executive shall,
not later than 10 working days after making that determination, givenotice in writing of the decision and the reasons for the decision toeach person who made the application.
(4) In this section, “connected person” means a person who is—
(a) a child of the person in respect of whom payment of ancil-
lary State support was made, or of the partner of suchperson, and—
(i) such child is under 21 years of age, or
(ii) where such child has attained the age of 21 years, that
the aggregate of his or her cash assets and relevantassets is not greater than the general assets deduct-ible amount,
(b) a sibling of the person in respect of whom payment of
ancillary State support was made, and the aggregate ofwhose cash assets and relevant assets is not greater thanthe general assets deductible amount,
(c) a relative of the person in respect of whom payment of
ancillary State support was made and—
(i) who is in receipt of a disability or similar allowance,
(ii) who is in receipt of blind person’s pension,[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(iii) who is in receipt of State pension (non-contributory),
(iv) who is in receipt, from a place outside the State, of
any equivalent to an allowance or pension referredto in subparagraph (i) ,(ii)or(iii),o r
(v) whose total income is not more than the maximum
rate of State pension (contributory),
(d) a person who, by reason of caring for the person in respect
of whom ancillary State support was paid, was in receiptof payment of Carer’s Allowance, Carer’s Benefit or theRespite Care Grant at any time during the period of 12months prior to such person entering into long-term resi-dential care, and that such care was provided for a con-tinuous period of not less than 6 months, or
(e) a relative of the person who is the owner of a building to
which the principal residence is attached.
(5) Where this section applies, the monies advanced by way of
ancillary State support shall not become repayable until the occur-rence of a deferred relevant event.
(6) In this section “deferred relevant event” means—
(a) where this section applies by reason of the death of a per-
son referred to in subsection (1)(b) , the death of the part-
ner of that person,
(b) that the conditions specified in subsection (2) cease to
apply,
(c) the death of a person who was a connected person or that
person ceasing to come within the definition of “con-nected person”, or
(d) the transfer of an interest in the asset concerned,
whichever first occurs.
(7) In this section, “cash assets”, “general assets deductible
amount” and “relevant assets” have the same meaning as they haveinSchedule 1 .
(8) The monies advanced by way of ancillary State support,
adjusted in accordance with Schedule 2 , shall, subject to the pro-
visions of this section, become due and payable on the day on whicha deferred relevant event occurs.
(9) Nothing in this section shall operate to defer or prevent the
operation of paragraph (c) or(d)of the definition of “relevant
event” in section 19(1) or the obligation to pay monies arising by
reason of the occurrence of a relevant event referred to in either ofthose paragraphs.
27Pt.3 S.20Appointment of
care representativein case of personnot having fullcapacity.
28[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
PART 4
Care Representative
21.—(1) This section applies to the following matters:
(a) the making of an application for ancillary State support,
(b) consenting to the creation of a charge in relation to an
interest in land situated within the State,
(c) taking necessary actions in connection with the application
for ancillary State support, the making of an order undersection 17(2) or the registration of such order in the Land
Registry or the Registry of Deeds (including the perfec-tion of the title of the person to whom the applicationrelates).
(2) It shall be presumed, until the contrary is established, that a
person has full mental capacity.
(3) This section does not apply to a person—
(a) who is a ward of court,
(b) who has appointed a person to be his or her attorney
under an enduring power of attorney and—
(i) the attorney is not prohibited or restricted by the
terms of the power from performing any matter towhich this section applies, and
(ii) the enduring power of attorney has been registered
and the registration has not been cancelled,
or
(c) in respect of whom another person is permitted by law to
act on behalf of that person in relation to a matter towhich this section applies notwithstanding that the personconcerned does not have the capacity to make a decisionin relation to such a matter.
(4) ( a) Where a person (a “relevant person”) does not, for the
time being, have the capacity to make a decision inrelation to a matter to which this section applies, a personbelonging to a class of persons referred to in subsection
(12) may apply to the court for an order appointing that
person to be a care representative in relation to a matterwhich is a matter to which this section applies and whichis specified in the order.
(b) Nothing in paragraph (a) shall be construed as requiring
the making of an application in relation to a relevant per-son unless section 16(3)(b) applies.
(5) If the court is satisfied that the relevant person concerned is
incapable, for the time being, of making a decision to which thissection applies, and the court determines that it is in the bestinterests of the relevant person concerned, having regard to—[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(a) the expressed wishes (if known) of the relevant person
concerned, and
(b) the circumstances of the relevant person concerned,
the court may appoint a person to be a care representative in accord-
ance with this section.
(6) The court may appoint more than one person to be a care
representative of a relevant person and unless the court otherwiseorders the care representatives shall act jointly.
(7) An order under this section appointing a care representative
shall not permit the care representative to make any decision or takeany action on behalf of the relevant person unless that decision isone to which this section applies and is specified in the order.
(8) An order under this section shall not be construed as making
a determination as respects the capacity of the relevant person con-cerned otherwise than in relation to a matter to which this sectionapplies and which is specified in the order.
(9) An order made under this section shall not otherwise affect
the power of the relevant person concerned to deal with his or herproperty and affairs.
(10) Notice of every application under this section shall be given
to the person to whom the application relates, unless the court deter-mines that such notice need not be given.
(11) A person applying to be appointed under this section shall
furnish such information to the court as the court may require inconnection with the application.
(12) Subject to subsections (13) to(15), a person belonging to one
of the following classes of persons may apply to be appointed as acare representative:
(a) where the person is a member of a couple, the other
member of the couple;
(b) a parent of the relevant person;
(c) a child of the relevant person;
(d) a brother or sister (whether of the whole or half blood) of
the relevant person;
(e) a niece or nephew of the relevant person;
(f) a grandchild of the relevant person;
(g) a grandparent of the relevant person;
(h) an aunt or uncle of the relevant person;
(i) a person, other than a person who is—
(i) the proprietor of a nursing home in which the relevant
person resides or is likely to reside, or
(ii) one of the registered medical practitioners who exam-
ined the relevant person and prepared a report
29Pt.4 S.21Pt.4 S.21
30[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
referred to in subsection (18) in respect of such
person,
and who appears to the court to have a good and
sufficient interest in the welfare of the relevant person.
(13) The right of a person referred to in subsection (12) to apply
to be a care representative shall operate in descending priority, buta person with a greater priority may consent in writing to an appli-cation by and appointment of a person with a lesser priority.
(14) An application may be made by a person referred to in sub-
section (12) even where there is a person with equal or greater
priority and consent under subsection (13) has not been given, and
notice of such application shall, subject to subsection (17) , be given
to each such person having an equal or greater priority.
(15) The court shall not be bound by the giving of a consent
referred to in subsection (13).
(16) Where there is more than one person within a class of per-
sons referred to in subsection (12) , an application may be made by
one such person, but the court shall be satisfied that all other personswithin that class or a class which has greater priority have receivedproper notice of the application.
(17) The court may give directions relating to the manner of giv-
ing notice to a person under this section and may deem any noticegiven to be sufficient or may, on sufficient cause being shown, dis-pense with the giving of notice of the application.
(18) ( a) The court shall not appoint a person to be a care represen-
tative unless it has before it a report from at least tworegistered medical practitioners who have examined therelevant person concerned and such reports confirm thatthe person does not have the capacity to make thedecisions to which this section applies and setting out thebasis for that conclusion.
(b) A report referred to in paragraph (a) shall be in the form
prescribed, under regulations made under section 36 , for
the purposes of this paragraph.
(19) The court may hear such other evidence relating to—
(a) the health or circumstances of the person concerned, and
(b) the circumstances of the partner of the person concerned,
as it considers necessary to determine whether it should make an
order under this section.
(20) On being satisfied that it is appropriate to do so, the court
may, in accordance with this section, appoint a person—
(a) who is of full age and full capacity, and
(b) who is, in the view of the court, a fit and proper person,
to be a representative (in this section referred to as a “care
representative”) of the person in respect of whom the applicationis made.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(21) The court shall not appoint a person to be a care representa-
tive if that person is—
(a) a person who has been adjudicated a bankrupt unless the
bankruptcy has been discharged or the adjudicationannulled,
(b) a person who has been convicted of an offence involving
fraud or dishonesty, or
(c) a person who has been convicted of an offence against the
person or property of the person concerned.
(22) An order appointing a care representative shall be subject to
such conditions restricting the care representative’s powers to act inrelation to the matters to which this section applies as the court con-siders appropriate and as are specified in the order.
(23) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Court appointing a
person to be a care representative of both members of a couplewhere—
(a) the provisions of this section have been complied with in
relation to both members of the couple, and
(b) the Court considers that it is in the best interests of both
members of the couple to do so.
(24) The Executive shall be entitled to deal with a care represen-
tative as if that care representative were the person in respect ofwhom he or she has been appointed and that such person had fulllegal capacity.
(25) Where an event specified in subsection (21) occurs as respects
a care representative which would have prevented that person’sappointment by reason of that subsection, the person concerned shallcease to be a care representative, and that person shall notify theExecutive and the Court by which the appointment was made within10 working days of such cesser.
(26) Where an order appointing a care representative ceases to
have effect (for whatever reason), such cesser shall not prejudice thevalidity of anything previously done by the care representative underand in accordance with the appointment.
(27) Any transaction between a care representative and another
person shall, in favour of that other person, be as valid as if it hadbeen entered into by the person to whom the order relates and thatother person.
(28) Where a person is appointed to be a care representative, he
or she shall have a duty to act in the best interests of the person inrespect of whom he or she has been appointed and to keep recordsrelating to his or her actions, and have a duty to give all reasonableassistance to the Executive in relation to the registration of an orderunder section 17(2).
(29) Where the court has appointed more than one care represen-
tative under subsection (6) an application may, on notice to any other
care representative, be made to the court for directions .
(30) On application being made to the court by any person
appearing to the court to have a good and sufficient interest in the
31Pt.4 S.21Pt.4 S.21
32[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
welfare of the person to whom the application relates, the court may
in accordance with this section appoint a person to be a care rep-resentative in place of a care representative previously appointedwhere—
(a) the care representative appointed previously has died or is
no longer of full capacity,
(b) the care representative has indicated to the court that he
or she wishes to resign, or
(c) the appointment of the care representative has been
revoked by the court.
(31) On application being made to it by any person appearing to
the court to have a good and sufficient interest in the welfare of theperson to whom the order relates, the court may at any time directa person appointed to be a care representative to do any of thefollowing:
(a) prepare and file with the court a report of his or her
actions as a care representative;
(b) attend before the court with such records and documents
as may be specified.
(32) The court on the hearing of the application under subsection
(30) or(31) may, if it considers it in the best interests of the person,
revoke the appointment of a person appointed to be a care represen-tative and appoint another person to be a care representative.
(33) Where more than one person stands appointed to act as a
care representative of a person, the court in hearing the applicationunder subsections (30) or(31) may revoke the appointment as
respects one of the care representatives but not as respects the otheror others and may appoint another person to be a care representativein place of the person whose appointment has been revoked.
(34) Where the court revokes the appointment of a care represen-
tative such revocation shall be without prejudice to the validity ofanything previously done by the representative under and in accord-ance with the appointment.
(35) Where—
(a) an order under this section; or
(b) any decision or action taken by a care representative on
foot of an order under this section,
is set aside or declared to be invalid by any court, such setting aside
or declaration of invalidity shall not affect the obligation or liabilityof—
(i) the person on behalf of whom ancillary State support was
paid, or
(ii) the person who, or on behalf of whom the request that
ancillary State support be paid was made,
to repay such monies as if the order, decision or action had not been
so set aside or declared to be invalid.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(36) Applications or proceedings—
(a) under this section, and
(b) to which subparagraph (xxxvi) (inserted by section 22 )o f
paragraph 1 of the Second Schedule to the Courts andCourt Officers Act 1995 refers,
shall be heard otherwise than in public.
(37) Unless the Court otherwise directs the requirements relating
to the giving of notice which apply to an application seeking theappointment of a care representative shall also apply to applicationsunder subsections (30) and (31).
(38) Any application or proceedings under this section (including
the making of an order under this section) in respect of a relevantperson, and whether or not subparagraph (xxxvi) (inserted by section
22) of the Courts and Court Officers Act 1995 applies in any part-
icular case—
(a) shall not prejudice the generality of the operation of any
rule of law or statutory provision which applies or mayapply in respect of any other application or proceedingsrelating, whether in whole or in part, to the capacity ofthe relevant person,
(b) shall be disregarded, in respect of any other application or
proceedings referred to in paragraph (a) , in so far as such
other application or proceedings relates or relate, as thecase may be, to the capacity of the relevant person, and
(c) shall have no effect otherwise than in connection with
matters related to this Act.
(39) A reference in this section, other than in subsection (35) ,t o
“court” is a reference to the Circuit Court and the exercise of thepowers of that court conferred by this section shall be within thejurisdiction of the circuit of the Circuit Court in which—
(a) the person to whom the application relates is residing at
the time of the making of the application, or
(b) the person to whom the application relates has resided at
any time during the period of 3 years immediately priorto the making of the application.
(40) An application to the Circuit Court under this section may
be made in any county of the circuit concerned to which by reasonofsubsection (39) an application may be made under this section and
may be transferred within such circuit from one county to anothercounty.
(41) In this section—
“relevant person” means a person—
(a) who is receiving care services,
(b) whom it is anticipated may request care services, or
(c) who is the partner of a person referred to in paragraph (a)
or(b).
33Pt.4 S.21Pt.4 S.21
Amendment of
Second Schedule toCourts and CourtOfficers Act 1995.
Notification of
death or dischargeof person providedwith financialsupport underScheme.
34[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(42) In this section a reference to “circumstances of the person”
includes in relation to a person who is a member of a couple, thecircumstances of the other member of the couple.
(43) For the purposes of this section a person shall be considered
not to have the capacity to make a decision relating to a matter towhich this section applies if he or she is unable—
(a) to understand the information relevant to the decision,
(b) to retain that information,
(c) to use or weigh that information as part of the process of
making the decision, or
(d) to communicate his or her decision (whether by talking,
using sign language or any other means) or, if thedecision requires the act of a third party to beimplemented, to communicate by any means with thatthird party.
22.—The Second Schedule to the Courts and Court Officers Act
1995 is amended by the addition of the following paragraph:
“(xxxvi) An order for the appointment of a care represen-
tative under section 21 of the Nursing Homes
Support Scheme Act 2009 if no objection is made
to the Court relating to that appointment by anynotice party to the application.”.
PART 5
Notification of specified matters
23.—(1) Where a person provided with financial support—
(a) dies in an approved nursing home,
(b) is discharged from an approved nursing home, or
(c) is otherwise no longer normally residing in an approved
nursing home,
the proprietor of the nursing home shall, not later than 3 working
days after the date of the person’s death, discharge, or other depar-ture, as the case may be, give notice in writing to the Executive of—
(i) the name of the person,
(ii) the name and address of—
(I) the person’s nominated contact, or
(II) the person’s next of kin, if known,
and
(iii) the date of the person’s death, discharge, or other depar-
ture, as the case may be.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(2) Where the proprietor of an approved nursing home proposes
to discharge from the nursing home a person provided with financialsupport, the proprietor shall, at least 10 working days before theproposed date of discharge, give notice in writing to the Executiveof—
(a) the name of the person,
(b) the proposed date of discharge, and
(c) the reasons for the discharge.
(3) The proprietor of a nursing home who, without reasonable
excuse, contravenes subsection (1) or(2)is guilty of an offence and
is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \1,000.
(4) Where a person maintained in an approved nursing home—
(a) starts to be provided with financial support,
(b) starts to be provided with an altered level of financial sup-
port, or
(c) ceases to be provided with financial support,
the Executive shall, not later than 10 working days after that start or
cessation, as the case may be, give notice in writing to the proprietorof the nursing home of that start or cessation, as the case may be.
(5) This section shall, with all necessary modifications, apply to
and in relation to a facility referred to in paragraph (a)(i) of the
definition of “long-term residential care services” and the proprietorof such a facility as it applies to and in relation to an approved nurs-ing home and the proprietor of an approved nursing home.
24.—(1) A person (or the person’s care representative, if any)
who is the subject of an application for State support or who is pro-vided with financial support shall give notice in writing to the Execu-tive of any material change in circumstances not later than 10 work-ing days after the material change in circumstances comes to theknowledge of the person.
(2) A person who, without reasonable excuse, contravenes subsec-
tion (1) is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary conviction
to a fine not exceeding \1,000.
(3) Any person who in compliance or purported compliance with
this section knowingly, or recklessly, gives the Executive informationwhich is false or misleading in a material particular is guilty of anoffence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding\5,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months or both.
(4) In this section, “material change in circumstances”, in relation
to a person, means any change in the circumstances of—
(a) the person or a child of the person of less than 21 years of
age, or
(b) if the person is a member of a couple, the partner of the
person or, if different from a child who falls within para-
graph (a) , a child of that partner of less than 21 years
of age,
35Pt.5 S.23
Notification of
material change incircumstances ofperson providedwith financialsupport.Pt.5 S.24
Notification of
change incircumstances ofconnected persons,etc.
Collection of
monies advanced byway of ancillaryState support.
36[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
which may result in—
(i) financial support not being provided to the person,
(ii) the amount of financial support provided to the person
being reduced, or
(iii) financial support which is being provided to the person
ceasing to be provided.
25.—(1) Where section 20 applies by reason of paragraph (a) of
subsection (2) of that section, and that paragraph ceases to apply, the
surviving partner concerned or his or her representative shall notifythe Executive of that fact within 20 working days of section 20(2)(a)
ceasing to apply.
(2) Where section 20 applies by reason of paragraph (b) ofsubsec-
tion (2) of that section, and the circumstances of the connected per-
son have altered in a manner which would mean that either subpara-
graph (i) or(iii) of that paragraph cease to apply, the connected
person concerned or his or her representative shall notify the Execu-tive of that fact within 20 working days of the subparagraph con-cerned ceasing to apply.
(3) Where section 20 applies by reason of paragraph (b) of subsec-
tion (2) of that section and a connected person ceases to be a connec-
ted person, that person shall notify the Executive of that fact within20 working days of such cesser.
(4) Where a person who is a partner of a person in respect of
whom ancillary State support was paid or a connected person diesand the repayment of ancillary State support has been deferredunder section 20 the personal representative of the deceased person
shall notify the Executive of the death as soon as practicable afterthe death, but in any event no later than 20 working days after theissue of a grant of representation in respect of the estate of thedeceased person concerned.
(5) A person who, without reasonable excuse, contravenes subsec-
tion (1), (2) or(3)is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding \1,000.
26.—(1) Where the Executive has advanced monies by way of
ancillary State support and a relevant event or a deferred relevantevent occurs, the Executive shall in accordance with section 19 or20
and Schedule 2 calculate the amount due in relation to such support
(in this section referred to as the “repayable amount”) and givenotice of that amount and particulars of how it is calculated to therelevant accountable person.
(2) ( a) The repayable amount together with any interest thereon
shall be a debt due and payable to the Executive.
(b) The Revenue Commissioners shall act as agent for the
Executive in respect of the collection of monies due tothe Executive under this Act in relation to ancillaryState support.
(3) The Executive shall within the relevant period referred to in
subsection (4) notify the Revenue Commissioners of—[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(a) the repayable amount,
(b) particulars of how that amount is calculated,
(c) particulars of the asset or assets against which the repay-
able amount is secured,
(d) the relevant event or deferred relevant event, as the case
may be, and the date of that event,
(e) the name, PPS Number and address of—
(i) the person in respect of whom ancillary State support
was paid,
(ii) where the person referred to in subparagraph (i) is a
member of a couple, the partner of that person, and
(iii) the relevant accountable person (if known to the
Executive),
and
(f) such other information as the Revenue Commissioners
may reasonably require for the purposes of this section.
(4) The relevant period referred to in subsection (3) means—
(a) in the case of a relevant event which is the death of a
person and where the asset concerned, or one of theassets concerned, is the principal residence of the person,the period of 3 months after the Executive (havingbecome aware of the occurrence of the relevant event) issatisfied that section 20 does not apply, and
(b) in any other case, the period of 3 months after it comes to
the knowledge of the Executive that a relevant event ora deferred relevant event has occurred.
(5) Where an amount becomes a repayable amount by reason of
the death of a person in respect of whom ancillary State supportwas advanced or the partner of such person, the repayable amount(together with interest accrued in accordance with subsection (6) )
shall be a debt due and payable out of the estate of the deceasedperson.
(6) Until the repayable amount is discharged to the Revenue
Commissioners interest shall continue to accrue, in accordance withregulations made under section 36 , on that part of the repayable
amount which is comprised of the aggregate of amounts of ancillaryState support adjusted in accordance with Schedule 2 .
(7) The Revenue Commissioners may furnish to the Executive
such information as relates to the collection of the repayable amountand any interest accruing on that amount pursuant to regulationsmade under section 36 .
(8) ( a) The Revenue Commissioners may take all steps which
they consider appropriate to recover the repayableamount and interest accrued thereon, including the bring-ing of legal proceedings in their own name.
37Pt.5 S.26Pt.5 S.26
38[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(b) In every case where legal proceedings are brought by the
Revenue Commissioners pursuant to paragraph (a) the
proceedings shall indicate clearly that they are broughtpursuant to the Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(9) Where monies are advanced by the Executive by way of ancil-
lary State support no action shall be commenced by the RevenueCommissioners—
(a) to recover the repayable amount or interest on any part of
the repayable amount, or
(b) seeking the sale of the relevant asset,
after the expiration of 12 years from the occurrence of the relevant
event or deferred relevant event concerned.
(10) The collection and recovery of a repayable amount shall be
under the care and management of the Revenue Commissioners andthe Commissioners may do all such acts as may be deemed necessaryand expedient for collecting, receiving and accounting for a repay-able amount in the like and in as full and ample a manner as theyare authorised to do in relation to income tax under their care andmanagement.
(11) Monies received by the Revenue Commissioners under this
section shall be paid by the Revenue Commissioners into the Cen-tral Fund.
(12) This section applies notwithstanding any provision of the
Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003.
(13) The person primarily accountable for payment of the repay-
able amount to the Revenue Commissioners shall be—
(a) the person in respect of whom ancillary State support
was paid;
(b) where the person referred to in paragraph (a) is a member
of a couple, the partner of that person;
(c) where the person referred to in paragraph (a) is deceased,
the personal representative of that person;
(d) in a case where section 20 applies, each person having an
interest in the asset;
(e) where a person referred to in paragraph (d) is deceased,
the personal representative of that person.
(14) A person who becomes entitled to an interest in the asset
against which the repayable amount is secured shall also be account-able for payment of the repayable amount to the Revenue Com-missioners.
(15) ( a) The liability of a person referred to in subsection (13)(c)
or(e)shall not exceed the gross value of the estate of the
deceased person concerned less the amount of the funeraland testamentary expenses.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(b) The liability of a person referred to in subsection (14) shall
not exceed the amount of the value of the interest in theasset to which the person becomes entitled.
(16) In this section “relevant accountable person” means—
(a) a person who as respects a particular relevant event or
deferred relevant event is primarily accountable, and
(b) a person who is accountable by reason of subsection (14) ,
for the payment of the repayable amount to the Revenue Com-
missioners.
27.—(1) This section applies to a deceased person—
(a) in respect of whom financial support was provided at any
time, or
(b) in respect of whose partner financial support was provided
at any time.
(2) The personal representative of a deceased person in relation
to whom this section applies—
(a) shall, as soon as is practicable but, in any case, not less
than 3 months before any distribution of the assets of theestate of the person, give the Executive—
(i) notice in writing of the representative’s intention to
distribute the assets, and
(ii) a schedule of the assets by reference to the statement
referred to in section 48(2) of the Capital Acquis-itions Tax Consolidation Act 2003 that is applicablein the case of that estate,
and
(b) if requested in writing by the Executive to do so before
the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph (a) ,
ensure that assets of the estate are retained which aresufficient to repay any amount which may be due andpayable—
(i) in respect of the amount due in relation to advances
of ancillary State support paid in respect of a personor at the request of a person,
(ii) pursuant to section 42 in respect of the deceased
person.
(3) For the purposes of determining an amount referred to in sub-
section (2)(b) , and notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,
the means of the deceased person concerned, for the period duringwhich the person was provided with financial support, shall, in theabsence of evidence to the contrary, be calculated on the basis thatthe person’s assets at the time of the death of the person belongedto the person for that entire period.
39Pt.5 S.26
Submission of
schedule of assetsto Executive wheredeceased personreceived financialsupport underScheme.Pt.5 S.27
Discharge of orders
made under section
17.
Joint ownership.
40[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(4) Without prejudice to any other obligation or liability the per-
sonal representative of a deceased person who contravenes subsec-
tion (2) and distributes the assets of the estate of the person without
payment of any amount referred to in subsection (2)(b) in relation
to the estate shall be personally liable for that amount but such liab-ility shall not exceed the gross value of the estate less the funeraland testamentary expenses of the deceased.
28.—(1) Where the monies advanced by way of ancillary State
support adjusted in accordance with this Act (together with anyinterest payable) have been discharged the Executive shall issue areceipt and the receipt shall act as a discharge or release of the orderto which it refers and may be registered in the Land Registry or theRegistry of Deeds as appropriate.
(2) A receipt under subsection (1) may be issued by an author-
ised person.
(3) An application to the Property Registration Authority for the
cancellation in the Land Registry of an entry of a charge on theregister of the property charged, where such charge relates to anorder created under section 17 , may be made by an authorised person
and such application may be made by electronic means if—
(a) it is lodged by electronic means in a manner approved
by, and
(b) it complies with the requirements specified by,
the Property Registration Authority.
(4) A receipt under subsection (1) and an application under sub-
section (3) shall be in the form prescribed by regulations made under
section 36.
(5) Where an application under subsection (3) is made to the
Property Registration Authority in electronic form which purportsto have been made by an authorised person it shall be presumed bythe Property Registration Authority that such electronic documentwas made and transmitted by the person by whom it purports tohave been made and transmitted.
PART 6
Joint ownership
29.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), where the Executive
makes an order under section 17(2) which relates to an interest in
land the subject of a joint tenancy, notwithstanding any rule of lawor statutory provision—
(a) the mortgage created thereby shall not, by reason of the
absence of the prior consent in writing of the other jointtenant or, where there are more than one other, all theother joint tenants, cause the severance of the joint ten-ancy in the interest in the land the subject of themortgage,
(b) the mortgage created thereby shall not, by reason of the
absence of the prior consent in writing of the other joint[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
tenant or, where there are more than one other, all the
other joint tenants, be void, and
(c) the severance of the joint tenancy, or the determination or
extinguishment of the interest of the joint tenant who hascreated such mortgage, shall not cause the charge con-cerned to be determined, extinguished or otherwise ceaseto have effect as respects such land.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the amount secured by an order
made under section 17(2) and to which subsection (1) refers shall
not exceed the amount which represents the value of such share orproportion of the interest in the land concerned to which the personor persons requesting payment of ancillary State support would havebeen entitled had the joint tenancy been severed on—
(a) the date on which the mortgage is deemed to have been
executed by reason of section 17(4), or
(b) an order for partition of the land had been made on that
date.
(3) Subsection (2) shall not apply where all the joint tenants in
the joint tenancy concerned have made a request to the Executivethat the ancillary State support be paid in relation to the interest inthe land concerned.
PART 7
Reviews and Appeals
30.—(1) Subject to subsections (5) ,(6)and (7), the Executive may,
in respect of a person who is being provided with care services orwhose application for State support has been determined, andwhether of its own initiative or at the request of the person, at anytime arrange for a review to be carried out of all or any of the follow-ing, as may be appropriate:
(a) the care needs of the person on the same basis as is speci-
fied in section 7(6) ;
(b) the financial assessment relating to the person carried out
under section 10 ;
(c) the weekly amount of payments made by way of ancillary
State support in respect of the person.
(2) The Executive shall cause a review under this section to be
carried out by a suitable person.
(3) The suitable person who carries out a review under this
section shall prepare a report thereon and provide it to theExecutive.
(4) Where the Executive, having regard to a review under this
section and the report provided to it under subsection (3) , is satisfied
that the determination or matter the subject of the review should bealtered, it may determine that the determination or matter underreview be altered accordingly.
41Pt.6 S.29
Reviews.Pt.7 S.30
Appeals regarding
hardship in certaincases.
42[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(5) An alteration referred to in subsection (4) shall, subject to
subsection (6) and unless the Executive otherwise determines (in
particular in any case where there has been a contravention of anyrequirement of this Act relevant to the determination or matter thesubject of the review), have effect from the date the determinationis made under subsection (4) .
(6) Where a determination under subsection (4) —
(a) results in the assessed weekly means of a person being
increased, or
(b) results in the amount of weekly payments of ancillary State
support being reduced,
the Executive shall not implement that determination before the
expiration of 40 working days after the date on which it has givennotice of the determination under subsection (8) .
(7) A person other than the Executive may not request a review
of a determination relating to a financial assessment unless—
(a) 12 months have elapsed since the date of the initial finan-
cial assessment or the most recent review of that assess-ment under this section (whichever is the later), or
(b) there has, to the satisfaction of the Executive, been a
material change in the financial circumstances of the per-son since the financial assessment or most recent reviewof that assessment under this section (whichever is thelater).
(8) Where the Executive makes a decision under subsection (4) in
respect of a person, it shall, not later than 10 working days afterthe date of the decision, give notice in writing to the person of thatdetermination stating the reasons for the decision and accompaniedby a copy of the report concerned provided to the Executive undersubsection (3) .
31.—(1) Where, in connection with the financial assessment of a
person, a transferred item is taken into account by the Executive indetermining the means of the person and the transfer of the trans-ferred item was effected prior to 9 October 2008, the person maymake an application to the Executive to recalculate the means of theperson by excluding one or more than one of the transferred itemson the ground that it is necessary to do so in order to avoid unduefinancial hardship arising by including that item in the financialassessment in relation to an applicable person.
(2) The Executive may refuse to consider or further consider an
application under subsection (1) by a person if—
(a) the application does not comply with that subsection, or
(b) an applicable person fails to provide the Executive with
such information in addition to the information providedby or with the application as the Executive may reason-ably require to enable it to determine the applicationunder subsection (5) .
(3) Where the Executive refuses under subsection (2) to consider
or further consider an application under subsection (1) by a person,[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
it shall, not later than 10 working days after the refusal, give the
person notice in writing of the decision and the reasons for thedecision.
(4) Any person who knowingly, or recklessly, gives the Executive
information which is false or misleading in a material particular in,with, or in connection with, an application under subsection (1) is
guilty of an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine notexceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months
or both.
(5) The Executive shall determine an application under subsec-
tion (1) —
(a) if the Executive is satisfied that a recalculation (excluding
one or more transferred items) of the means of the per-son is necessary in order to avoid undue financial hard-ship in relation to an applicable person, by carrying outthe recalculation and adjusting the amount of weeklyassessed means of the person accordingly,
(b) if the Executive is not so satisfied, by refusing the
application.
(6) Where the Executive determines under subsection (1) an
application under subsection (1) by a person, it shall, not later than
10 working days after the determination, give notice in writing to theperson of the decision and the reasons for the decision.
(7) In this section—
“applicable person”, in relation to an application under subsection
(1), means—
(a) the person to whom the financial assessment relates,
(b) where the person to whom the financial assessment relates
is a member of a couple, the partner of that person, or
(c) a child of a person referred to in paragraph (a) or(b)
where that child is less than 21 years of age;
“transferred item” means transferred income or a transferred asset.
32.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , a person (“the appellant”)
aggrieved by a decision of the Executive referred to in section 7(8) ,
9(3),10(7) ,11(1), 16, 30(4) ,31(2) or31(5) may appeal against the
decision by giving the Executive a notice—
(a) in the specified form stating the reasons for the appeal,
and
(b) not later than 40 working days after notice of the decision
was given to the appellant under section 7(9) ,9(4),10(8) ,
11(3) ,16(16) ,30(8) ,31(3) or31(6) respectively.
43Pt.7 S.31
Appeals against
certain decisions ofExecutive.Pt.7 S.32
44[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(2) ( a) The Executive, with the consent of the Minister, shall
appoint a panel of suitable persons to consider appealsreceived under subsection (1).
(b) Where the Executive receives an appeal under subsection
(1), it shall appoint a suitable person from the panel
referred to in paragraph (a) to consider the appeal.
(3) The person appointed pursuant to subsection (2) to consider
an appeal under subsection (1) shall—
(a) be independent in the performance of the person’s func-
tions under this Act as a person so appointed,
(b) not be confined to the grounds on which the decision of
the Executive was based, but may decide the matterwhich is the subject of the appeal as if it were beingdecided for the first time,
(c) subject to paragraph (a) , comply with guidelines issued by
the Executive under section 35 in respect of the pro-
cedure to be followed with respect to the considerationof any appeal,
(d) consider any written or oral objections made by the appell-
ant in support of the appeal,
(e) make a decision (“relevant decision”) in writing determin-
ing the appeal, which may be a decision to—
(i) confirm the decision the subject of the appeal,
(ii) revoke that decision and replace it with such other
decision as the person thinks appropriate, or
(iii) refer the matter concerned back to the Executive for
reconsideration in accordance with such directions as
the person thinks appropriate,
(f) send a copy of the relevant decision to the appellant and
the Executive together with the person’s reasons for therelevant decision, and
(g) give the Executive such directions as the person thinks
appropriate.
(4) A person (including the Executive) aggrieved by the relevant
decision may appeal to the High Court against the decision on apoint of law.
(5) An appeal under subsection (4) shall, where the appellant so
requests, be heard otherwise than in public.
(6) The Executive shall, on complying with any direction given
under subsection (3)(e)(iii) or(g), give notice in writing to the appell-
ant concerned of the Executive’s compliance with the direction.
(7) A reference in this section to a decision made by the Execu-
tive includes a determination and refusal made by the Executive.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
PART 8
Charges in Respect of Care Services
33.—(1) Notwithstanding any other statutory provision, charges
may be made by the Executive in respect of the provision of careservices within the meaning of paragraph (a)(i) of the definition of
“long-term residential care services”.
(2) Following consultation with the Executive, the Minister shall
lay before the Houses of the Oireachtas details of the goods andservices which constitute care services within the meaning of para-
graph (a)(i) of the definition of “long-term residential care services”.
(3) Charges in respect of care services within the meaning of para-
graph (a)(i) of the definition of “long-term residential care services”
which are provided by the Executive shall not exceed the cost ofproviding such services, which cost shall be determined by the Execu-tive in accordance with subsection (2) .
(4) In determining the cost of care services in accordance with
subsections (2) and (3), the Executive—
(a) subject to paragraph (b) , shall include only the costs
incurred by the Executive in relation to the provision ofsuch care services, and
(b) shall not include costs which are not directly attributable
to the provision of such care services except such costswhich are prescribed, under regulations made undersection 36 , for the purposes of this paragraph.
(5) Charges in respect of care services within the meaning of para-
graph (a)(i) of the definition of “long-term residential care services”
insection 3 which are provided on behalf of the Executive shall not
exceed the cost incurred by the Executive in relation to the provisionof such care services.
(6) Different charges may be made by reference to the class of
care services provided and the cost of that class of care services asdetermined in accordance with subsections (3) to(5).
(7) Charges under this section shall not be payable in respect of
care services provided by the Executive or on behalf of the Execu-tive to—
(a) a person under 18 years of age,
(b) a woman in respect of motherhood,
(c) a person detained involuntarily under the Mental Health
Acts 1945 to 2001,
(d) a person who pursuant to section 2 of the Health
(Amendment) Act 1996, in the opinion of the Executive,has contracted Hepatitis C directly or indirectly from theuse of Human Immunoglobulin Anti-D or the receiptwithin the State of another blood product or a bloodtransfusion, or
(e) a person in respect of the treatment of diseases prescribed
under Part IV of the Health Act 1947.
45Charges in respect
of care services.Pt.8
Amendment of
Health Act 1970.
46[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
34.—(1) Section 52 of the Health Act 1970 is amended by
inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) The Health Service Executive may make available
long-term residential care services within the meaning of theNursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 .”.
(2) Section 53 (as amended by section 4 of the Health
(Amendment) Act 2005) of the Health Act 1970 is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) Subject to subsection (1A), charges shall not be
made for in-patient services made available under section52 except as provided for in subsection (2).”,
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) Charges shall be made for long-term residential
care services in accordance with the Nursing Homes Sup-
port Scheme Act 2009 .
(1B) A reference in subsection (1A) to long-term resi-
dential care services shall be construed as a reference tolong-term residential care services within the meaning oftheNursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 as respects
such services provided to a person who first begins toreceive those services after the coming into operation ofsection 6(2)(c) of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme
Act 2009 .
(1C) A person in respect of whom charges are being
made under subsection (2) shall not be required to pay
charges under subsection (1A).”.
(3) The Health Act 1970 is amended by inserting the following
section after section 53:
“Charges for
in-patientservices incertain cases.53A.—(1) This section applies where in-patient
services (not being long-term residential careservices within the meaning of the Nursing Homes
Support Scheme Act 2009 ) are provided to a per-
son in a hospital for the care and treatment ofpatients with acute ailments (including any psychi-atric ailment) and a medical practitioner desig-nated by the Health Service Executive has certi-fied in writing that the person in receipt of suchservices does not require medically acute care andtreatment in respect of any such ailment.
(2) Where this section applies, notwithstanding
section 53, charges may be made in respect of in-patient services on the basis specified in subsection(3) as if those services were long-term residentialcare services within the meaning of the Nursing
Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 provided by the
Health Service Executive, and whether or not theperson concerned has made an application forState support under section 9 of that Act.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(3) The charges referred to in subsection (2)
shall be determined by the average cost of long-term residential care services as determined by theHealth Service Executive in facilities operated bythe Health Service Executive and publicly desig-nated in writing as facilities predominantly for thecare of older people.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), this section shall
not apply where a person has applied for a careneeds assessment under section 7 of the Nursing
Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 and is awaiting a
determination by the Executive under section 7 of
that Act.
(5) Subsection (4) shall not apply where a per-
son withdraws an application under section 7 of
theNursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 and
makes a subsequent application.”.
PART 9
Miscellaneous
35.—(1) The Executive may, with the consent of the Minister,
issue guidelines consistent with this Act, whether relating to the per-formance of a function of the Executive or otherwise, for the purposeof providing practical guidance in respect of any provision of thisAct or regulations made under it.
(2) The Executive shall arrange for guidelines issued under this
section to be published in such manner as the Executive considersappropriate.
36.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) to(11), the Minister may, for
the purposes of enabling any provision of this Act to have full effect,make regulations prescribing any matter or thing which is referredto in this Act as prescribed or to be prescribed.
(2) The Minister may, following prior consultation with the
Executive and with the consent of the Minister for Finance, makeregulations for the purposes of paragraph (b) ofsubsection (4) of
section 33 by prescribing, by reference to a class of care services, a
class of costs which, although not directly attributable to the pro-vision of such class of care services, the Minister is satisfied is connec-ted with, the provision of such class of care services.
(3) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of para-
graph (a) of the definition of “allowable deduction” in paragraph 1
ofPart 3 ofSchedule 1 by prescribing a class or classes of expenditure
which relate to the reasonable living expenses of a person to whomthe financial assessment relates and his or her partner or who is amember of a class of dependant relatives prescribed by thoseregulations.
(4) ( a) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of
prescribing an amount for the purposes of subparagraph
(ii)ofparagraph (a) of the definition of “general assets
deductible amount” in paragraph 1 ofPart 3 ofSchedule
1which amount—
47Pt.8 S.34
Guidelines.
Regulations.Pt.9 S.36
48[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(i) shall not be less than the amount referred to in subpa-
ragraph (i) ofparagraph (a) of that definition,
(ii) shall not be less than the amount prescribed on the
most recent exercise of this power, and
(iii) shall be adjusted in line with changes in the consumer
price index calculated from mid-May 2008 where theamount specified in subparagraph (i) ofparagraph
(a)of that definition is the base figure.
(b) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of
prescribing an amount for the purposes of subparagraph
(ii)ofparagraph (b) of the definition of “general assets
deductible amount” in paragraph 1 ofPart 3 ofSchedule
1which amount—
(i) shall not be less than the amount referred to in subpa-
ragraph (i) ofparagraph (b) of that definition,
(ii) shall not be less than the amount prescribed on the
most recent exercise of this power, and
(iii) shall be adjusted in line with changes in the consumer
price index calculated from mid-May 2008 where theamount specified in subparagraph (i) ofparagraph
(b)of that definition is the base figure.
(5) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of para-
graph (j) of the definition of “income” in paragraph 1 ofPart 3 of
Schedule 1 by prescribing a class or classes of benefit not coming
within paragraphs (a) to(i)of that definition but which the Minister
considers to be a form of income, and for the purposes of this subsec-tion benefit shall include capital gains.
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of section 26(8), the Mini-
ster may, following prior consultation with the Revenue Commis-sioners and with the consent of the Minister for Finance, make regu-lations providing for the conferral of powers on the RevenueCommissioners with respect to the collection and recovery of repay-able amounts within the meaning of section 26(1) and interest
thereon (and, for this purpose, the regulations may adapt, with orwithout modifications, the provisions of any enactment relating tothe collection or recovery of, or the inspection of records or the fur-nishing of information in relation to, any tax charged or imposed bythat enactment).
(7) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (6) , regu-
lations made under that subsection may, in respect of amountsreferred to in that subsection, provide for—
(a) the form in which payment shall be made,
(b) the charging of interest and the appropriate percentage
rate of interest to be charged,
(c) circumstances where interest shall not be charged,
(d) the period of time following the occurrence of the event
which caused the amounts to become repayable inrespect of which interest shall not be charged,[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(e) the order of application of any payment towards interest
or capital comprised in such amounts,
(f) any matters consequential on, or incidental to, the
foregoing.
(8) The Minister may, in respect of any difficulty which arises dur-
ing the period of 3 years from the commencement of section 5 in
bringing this Act into operation, by regulations do anything whichappears to be necessary or expedient for bringing this Act into oper-ation and regulations under this subsection may, in so far only asmay appear necessary for carrying the regulations into effect, modifya provision of this Act if the modification is in conformity with thepurposes, principles and spirit of this Act.
(9) Regulations under this section may contain such incidental,
supplementary and consequential provisions as appear to the Mini-ster to be necessary or expedient for the purposes of the regulations.
(10) Where the Minister proposes to make regulations under sub-
section (8) —
(a) he or she shall, before doing so, consult with such other
(if any) Minister of the Government as the Minister con-siders appropriate having regard to the functions of thatother Minister of the Government in relation to the pro-posed regulations, and
(b) he or she shall cause a draft of the regulations to be laid
before each House of the Oireachtas and the regulationsshall not be made until a resolution approving of the drafthas been passed by each such House.
(11) Every regulation made under this section (other than a regu-
lation referred to in subsection (10) ) shall be laid by the Minister
before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it ismade and, if a resolution annulling the regulation is passed by eithersuch House within the next 21 days on which that House has satafter the regulation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulledaccordingly, but without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-viously done thereunder.
37.—Section 3 of the Consumer Credit Act 1995 is amended in
subsection (2) by the insertion after paragraph ( e) of the following
paragraph:
“(ea) payments of ancillary State support advanced by the
Health Service Executive under the Nursing Homes
Support Scheme Act 2009 ,”.
38.—Section 7A (inserted by section 3 of the Health (Nursing
Homes) (Amendment) Act 2007) of the Health (Nursing Homes)Act 1990 is amended by inserting the following subsection after sub-section (4):
“(4A) The Executive shall refuse to consider an application
made on or after the commencement of section 6(1)(d) of the
Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 .”.
49Pt.9 S.36
Amendment of
Consumer CreditAct 1995.
Amendment of
section 7A ofHealth (NursingHomes) Act 1990.Pt.9
Transitional
provisions.
Designation by
Minister of suitableperson to negotiateagreements.
Amendment of
National TreatmentPurchase FundBoard(Establishment)Order 2004.
50[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
39.—(1) A person in receipt of a relevant subvention immediately
before the commencement of this subsection shall continue to bepaid the relevant subvention until—
(a) such payment ceases in accordance with the provisions of
the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 (as amended bythe Health (Nursing Homes) (Amendment) Act 2007), or
(b) the date from which by reason of the determination of the
Executive under section 11(1) State support is to be paid
in respect of the person,
whichever first occurs.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not prejudice the operation of section 7D
(inserted by section 3 of the Health (Nursing Homes) (Amendment)Act 2007) of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 in so far as thatsection 7D provides for the payment of a relevant subvention to aperson referred to in that subsection which is different from the rel-evant subvention which is paid to that person immediately beforethe commencement of that subsection.
40.—The Minister shall, as soon as is practicable, by notice in writ-
ing designate a person to negotiate with persons carrying on the busi-ness of a nursing home for the purposes of reaching an agreementreferred to in paragraph (a)(ii) or(b)(ii) of the definition of
“approved nursing home”.
41.—(1) The National Treatment Purchase Fund Board
(Establishment) Order 2004 (S.I. No. 179 of 2004) is amended—
(a) in Article 2, by inserting the following definitions:
“ ‘approved nursing home’ has the same meaning as in the
Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 ;
‘long-term residential care services’ means long-term resi-
dential care services within the meaning of paragraph
(a)(ii) of the definition of ‘long-term residential care
services’ in section 3(1) of the Nursing Homes Support
Scheme Act 2009 ;
‘nursing home’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 2
of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 and includes aninstitution referred to in section 2(1)( h) of that Act;”,
and
(b) in Article 4—
(i) by the inserting after paragraph (1)( b) the following
subparagraph:
“(ba) to make arrangements with a person it con-
siders to be appropriate, being a pro-prietor of a nursing home, relating to theprice at which long-term residential careservices will be provided by such personto persons requiring such services and whoare in receipt of financial support under[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
the Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 ;”,
(ii) by the inserting after paragraph (1) the following
paragraphs:
“(1A) Arrangements referred to in paragraph
(1)(ba) shall be subject to a condition that the nursing
home is an approved nursing home or that thearrangements will not apply unless the nursing homebecomes an approved nursing home.
(1B) Arrangements referred to in paragraph
(1)(ba) shall be notified to the Health Service Execu-
tive who may publish such information relating tothose arrangements as it considers appropriate.”,
and
(iii) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following
paragraph:
“(3) In performing its functions under paragraph
(1)(ba) the Board may examine the records and
accounts of an approved nursing home or of a nursinghome the proprietor of which proposes to enter intoarrangements under paragraph (1)( ba).”.
42.—(1) Where, in connection with a financial assessment, or a
review of a financial assessment under section 30 , a person does not
disclose, or makes a misstatement as respects the amount or valueof income, transferred income, cash assets, relevant assets or trans-ferred assets, and receives a greater amount of State support thanwould have been the case if there had not been such non-disclosureor misstatement, as the case may be, the amount, as determined bythe Executive, of the excess of State support over the amount whichthe person would have received had such non-disclosure or misstate-ment, as the case may be, not occurred shall be payable by the personto the Executive on demand and may be recovered by the Executiveas a simple contract debt in any court of competent jurisdiction fromthe person or the estate of that person.
(2) Where an excess amount of State support has been paid in
respect of a person and such excess arises by reason of informationsupplied by the person’s partner, such excess shall, to the extent thatit arises by reason of the non-disclosure or misstatement by that part-ner, be payable by the partner to the Executive on demand and maybe recovered from the partner of the person in respect of whom theState support has been paid or the estate of such partner as a simplecontract debt in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) Without prejudice to the rights of the Executive under subsec-
tions (1) and (2), the Executive may reduce the amount of State
support which would be payable in respect of the person until thetotal of excess payments has been recovered by the Executive.
43.—(1) It is declared that the supply of care services to a person,
which the Executive pursuant to section 7 has determined are appro-
priate for the needs of that person, shall be conclusively presumedas being for the benefit of and necessary for the health and welfare
51Pt.9 S.41
Non-disclosure and
misstatementrelating to financialassessments.
Contracts for
necessaries.Pt.9 S.43
Power of Executive
to specify forms.
52[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
of that person and to have been supplied at his or her request, not-
withstanding any legal incapacity of that person and any contactentered into with that person or on his or her behalf in relation tosuch care services shall be valid and enforceable notwithstanding anyrule of law or statutory provision.
(2) Subsection (1) shall apply with all necessary modifications to
the provision of ancillary State support.
(3) The liability of any member of a relevant couple in respect of
any monies due under this Act in respect of care services or ancillaryState support shall not be affected by any lack of capacity on thepart of—
(a) the person to whom the services were supplied or in
respect of whom ancillary State support is paid, or
(b) the partner of such person.
(4) The invalidity of any charge created pursuant to this Act shall
not affect the underlying liability in respect of the repayment of anymonies to the Executive.
44.—(1) The Executive may specify the form of any document
required by this Act to be in the specified form and the form of suchother documents required for the purposes of this Act as the Execu-tive thinks appropriate.
(2) A form specified under this section shall be—
(a) completed in accordance with such directions and instruc-
tions as are specified in the form,
(b) accompanied by such documents (including instruments,
certificates, duplicates of the form and statutorydeclarations) as are specified in the form, and
(c) if the completed form is required to be provided to the
Executive or any other person, so provided in the man-ner, if any, specified in the form.
(3) The Executive’s power under subsection (1) —
(a) may be exercised in such a way as to require the person
completing the form to make a statutory declaration asto whether the particulars contained in the form are trueand correct to the best of that person’s knowledge andbelief,
(b) may be exercised in such a way as to specify two or more
forms of any document referred to in that subsectionwhether as alternatives, or to provide for particular cir-cumstances or particular cases, as the Executive thinksappropriate.
(4) The form specified under this section of an application for
State support in respect of a person may require the application tobe accompanied by—
(a) valuations of assets the person has or had any interests in
and valuations of those interests,[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(b) if the person is a member of a couple, valuations of assets
the other member of the couple has or had any interestsin and valuations of those interests, and
(c) such other information as the Minister may prescribe.
45.—(1) Notwithstanding any provision of the Data Protection
Acts 1988 to 2003, the Executive may, in accordance with thissection, access and process any relevant records for the purposes ofthis Act.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the Executive shall, as soon as is
practicable after the commencement of this section, prepare andcause to be published a code of practice to be complied with by aperson accessing and processing any relevant records pursuant tosubsection (1) , or a person referred to in subsection (4) having any
relevant information in the person’s possession, custody or control,in so far as the relevant records or relevant information, as the casemay be, consist of personal data.
(3) The Executive shall not perform the function under subsection
(2)except after consultation with the Data Protection Commissioner
within the meaning of the Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003.
(4) Subject to subsection (5) , a person shall not disclose relevant
information except for the purpose of the performance of a functionby the person under this Act.
(5) A person may disclose relevant information to a member of
the Garda Sı ´ocha´na if the person reasonably believes that the dis-
closure is necessary in order to prevent the continuance of an actconstituting an offence.
(6) Documents that are prepared for the purpose of performing a
function under this Act shall not constitute Departmental recordswithin the meaning of section 2(2) of the National Archives Act1986.
(7) The Executive shall determine the storage, retention or dis-
posal of—
(a) applications for State support (including any documents
accompanying applications),
(b) documents referred to in subsection (6) , and
(c) relevant records which are in the possession of, or under
the control of, the Executive.
(8) The Executive may request in writing a person to provide the
Executive with access to, or copies of, relevant records which—
(a) are in the possession of, or under the control of, the per-
son, and
(b) will or may assist the Executive to perform its functions
under this Act.
(9) A person the subject of a request under subsection (8) shall
comply with the request as soon as is practicable after the personreceives the request.
53Pt.9 S.44
Records.Pt.9 S.45
Relief of undue
hardship.
Authority of person
to act on behalf ofanother person.
54[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(10) A person who, without reasonable excuse, contravenes sub-
section (4) or(9)is guilty of an offence and is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\25,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years
or both.
(11) In this section—
“relevant information”, in relation to a person referred to in subsec-
tion (4) , means information that is provided under this Act to the
Executive, a suitable person, or a person appointed under section
32(2) and obtained by the first-mentioned person in the course of
the performance of a function of the person under this Act;
“relevant record” means any record which will or may assist the
Executive to determine an application for State support or a requestfor refundable State support.
46.—(1) The Minister, with the consent of the Minister for Fin-
ance, may, for the purpose of the relief of undue hardship, makeregulations in relation to the carrying out of financial assessmentsconsistent with this Act.
(2) The power to make regulations under this section includes the
power to provide that the income or assets (or a specified part ofsuch income or assets) of one member of a couple be disregardedin the carrying out of a financial assessment in connection with anapplication for State support by the other member of the couplewhere exceptional circumstances specified in the regulations areshown to exist to the satisfaction of the Executive or the personrequested pursuant to section 10 to carry out the financial
assessment.
(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid by the
Minister before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may beafter it is made and, if a resolution annulling the regulation is passedby either such House within the next 21 days on which that Househas sat after the regulation is laid before it, the regulation shall beannulled accordingly, but without prejudice to the validity of any-thing previously done thereunder.
47.—(1) Subject to subsections (2), (4) and (9), a specified person
may act on behalf of another person in relation to any matter underthis Act, including, but not limited to, any application, appeal, reviewor the giving of consent under section 7(13) , where that other person
is not of full mental capacity.
(2) The Executive may refuse to deal with a person purporting to
be a specified person acting on behalf of a person to whom an appli-cation for State support relates (the relevant person) unless the first-mentioned person satisfies the Executive that the first-mentionedperson is in fact a specified person acting on behalf of the relevantperson.
(3) When the Executive refuses under subsection (2) to deal with
a person purporting to be a specified person, it shall, not later than[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
10 working days after the refusal, give both the specified person and
the relevant person notice in writing of the decision and the reasonsfor the decision.
(4) The Executive may refuse to deal with a specified person in
respect of a relevant matter if the Executive is not satisfied that thespecified person is acting in the best interests of the relevant personin respect of that matter.
(5) When the Executive refuses under subsection (4) to deal with
a specified person in respect of a relevant matter, it shall, not laterthan 10 working days after the refusal, give the specified person andthe relevant person notice in writing of the decision and the reasonsfor the decision.
(6) Subject to subsections (2) and (4), no provision of this Act
shall operate to prevent the Executive from dealing with a specifiedperson, and anything done by the specified person shall be bindingupon the person on whose behalf the action was taken.
(7) In this section, “specified person”, in relation to a person,
means—
(a) where the person is a ward of court, the Committee of the
Person of the ward, duly authorised in that behalf,
(b) a person appointed by a relevant person to be his or her
attorney under an enduring power of attorney and—
(i) the attorney is not prohibited or restricted by the
terms of the power from performing any matter towhich this section applies, and
(ii) the enduring power of attorney has been registered
and the registration has not been cancelled,
(c) a care representative appointed pursuant to an application
under section 21 ,
(d) where the person is a member of a couple, the other
member of the couple,
(e) a relative of the person who is not less than 18 years of age,
(f) a next friend appointed by a court,
(g) a legal representative of the person, or
(h) a registered medical practitioner, a registered nurse or
registered social worker.
(8) The categories of person who may act as a specified person
referred to in paragraphs (a) ,(b)and (c)ofsubsection (7) shall have
priority over the categories of person referred to in paragraphs (d)
to(h)ofsubsection (7) but a person referred to in paragraphs (a) to
(c)of such subsection may consent in writing to a person with lesser
priority acting as a specified person.
(9) Subsection (1) shall not operate to permit a person—
(a) to act as a care representative unless that person is
appointed as a care representative under section 21 ,o r
55Pt.9 S.47Pt.9 S.47
Amendment of
TaxesConsolidation Act1997.
Section 10.
56[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(b) to make a request that ancillary State support be paid
unless that person is appointed as a care representativeunder section 21 .
48.—The Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 is amended by the inser-
tion of the following section after section 192B:
“Exemption in
respect ofpayments ofState support.192C.—(1) Notwithstanding any other pro-
vision of the Income Tax Acts, a person in receiptof care services shall be exempt from income taxin respect of any State support provided to theperson under section 12(2) of the Nursing Homes
Support Scheme Act 2009 and the payment shall
not be reckoned in computing the person’s incomefor the purposes of the Income Tax Acts.
(2) Notwithstanding any provision of the
Income Tax Acts, any payment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be paid without deduction ofincome tax.
(3) In this section ‘care services’ and ‘State sup-
port’ have the same meaning as in the Nursing
Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 .”.
SCHEDULE 1
Assessment of Means
PART 1
Assessment of means of a person who is not a member of a couple
1. The means of a person who is not a member of a couple shall,
subject to Part 3 , be assessed on the basis of the rules in this Part.
Assessment of income
2. Assess the weekly income following the directions at steps A
to E:
A. Establish the annual income of the person using the defini-
tion of “income”.
B. Deduct allowable deductions.C. Divide amount produced by step B by 52 to establish net
weekly income.
D. Take 80 per cent of amount produced by step C (net
weekly income) which amount, unless step E applies, isthe weekly assessed income.
E. Where applying the rule in step C produces a result
whereby 20 per cent of net weekly income is less than theminimum retained income threshold, the weekly assessedincome is the amount established by step C less the mini-mum retained income threshold.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
Assessment of cash assets
3. Assess the weekly value of the cash assets by following the
directions at steps A to F:
A. Establish all the cash assets of the person being assessed
using the definition of “cash assets” and value each cashasset on the basis of the estimated market value.
B. Deduct from the estimated market value of each cash asset
the amount of allowable deductions relating to that cashasset to produce the net value of each cash asset.
C. Aggregate all net values of cash assets established under
step B.
D. Deduct general assets deductible amount from the amount
produced by step C to produce annual assessed cashassets.
E. Take 5 per cent of the amount produced by step D to
establish the amount of the annual assessed cash assets.
F. Divide amount produced by step E by 52 to produce
weekly assessed cash assets.
Assessment of relevant assets
4. Assess the weekly value of the relevant assets by following the
directions at steps A to F:
A. Establish all assets which are relevant assets using the
definition of “relevant assets” of the person beingassessed and value each relevant asset on the basis of theestimated market value.
B. Deduct from the estimated market value of each relevant
asset the amount of allowable deductions relating to thatrelevant asset to produce the net value of each relevantasset.
C. Aggregate all net values of relevant assets to produce total
net value of relevant assets.
D. If the general assets deductible amount has not been fully
used in connection with the cash assets assessment applyunused balance by deducting the unused amount fromtotal net value of relevant assets produced by step C.
E. Take 5 per cent of the amount produced by step D or, if
step D does not apply, by Step C to produce the annualassessed relevant assets amount.
F. To establish assessed weekly value of relevant assets divide
result of step E by 52.
PART 2
Assessment of means of a person who is a member of a couple
1. The means of a person who is a member of a couple shall,
subject to Part 3 , be assessed on the basis of the rules in this Part.
57Sch. 1Sch. 1
58[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
Assessment of income
2. Assess the weekly income by following the directions at steps
At oF :
A. Establish the annual income of the person and his or her
partner using the definition of “income”.
B. From the annual income of each of those persons deduct
allowable deductions applicable to that person’s incometo establish net annual income of each member of thecouple.
C. Aggregate the two net annual incomes established under
step B.
D. Divide amount produced by step C by 52 to establish net
weekly income.
E. Take 40 per cent of amount produced by step D and the
amount established following that calculation is, unlessstep F applies, the weekly assessed income.
F. Where applying the rule in step E produces a result
whereby 60 per cent of net weekly income is less than theminimum retained income threshold, the weekly assessedincome is the amount established by step D less theamount which is the minimum retained income threshold.
Assessment of cash assets
3. Assess the weekly value of the cash assets by following the
directions at steps A to G:
A. Establish all the cash assets of the person to whom the
assessment relates and his or her partner using the defini-tion of “cash assets” and value each cash asset on thebasis of the estimated market value.
B. Deduct from the estimated market value of each cash asset
the amount of allowable deductions relating to that cashasset to produce net value of each cash asset.
C. Aggregate all net values of cash assets established under
step B.
D. Deduct general assets deductible amount from the amount
produced by step C to establish total assessed cash assets.
E. Take 5 per cent of the amount produced by step D to
establish the amount of the annual assessed cash assetsof the couple.
F. Divide amount established by step E by 2 to establish the
amount of the annual assessed cash assets of the personin respect of whom the financial assessment is beingcarried out.
G. Divide amount established by step F by 52 to produce the
assessed weekly cash assets of the person in respect ofwhom the financial assessment is being carried out.[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
Assessment of relevant assets
4. Assess the weekly value of the relevant assets by following the
directions at steps A to G:
A. Establish all assets which are relevant assets of the person
in respect of whom the financial assessment is beingcarried out and his or her partner using the definition of“relevant assets” and value each relevant asset on thebasis of estimated market value.
B. Deduct from the estimated market value of each relevant
asset the amount of allowable deductions relating to thatrelevant asset to produce the net value of each relevantasset.
C. Aggregate all net values of relevant assets established
under step B.
D. If the general assets deductible amount has not been fully
used in connection with the cash assets assessment thenapply the unused balance by deducting the unusedamount from the amount established by step C.
E. Take 5 per cent of the amount established by step D or, if
step D does not apply, by Step C to establish the annualassessed relevant assets amount.
F. Divide amount established by step E by 2 to establish the
amount of the annual assessed relevant assets of the per-son in respect of whom the financial assessment is beingcarried out.
G. Divide the amount established by step F by 52 to produce
the assessed weekly value of relevant assets of the personin respect of whom the financial assessment is beingcarried out.
PART 3
INTERPRETATION AND MISCELLANEOUS
1. In this Schedule—
“allowable deduction”—
(a) subject to paragraph 2 , in relation to income, means—
(i) income tax required by law to be deducted or paid
from the income and in respect of which (other thanas respects payments or expenses to which clauses
(iv),(v)or(vi)refer) the applicant or any other per-
son is not entitled to claim an exemption, relief orallowance or the repayment of tax already paid,
(ii) social insurance contributions,(iii) levies required by law to be paid,(iv) payments which—
59Sch. 1Sch. 1
60[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(I) are paid in respect of interest on monies bor-
rowed for the purchase, repair or improvementof the principal residence of the person, or
(II) are paid in respect of rent on the principal resi-
dence of the person concerned under an agree-ment entered into at arm’s length if, and onlyfor so long as, there resides therein the person’spartner or a child under the age of 21 years ofthe person or the person’s partner,
less the amount of any relief from income tax which
may be claimed in respect of such payments,
(v) health expenses to which section 469 of the Taxes
Consolidation Act 1997 applies, less the amount ofany relief from income tax which may be claimed bythe applicant, the spouse of the applicant or a rela-tive, but for the purposes of this subparagraph anypayments made by a person in respect of careservices shall not be included,
(vi) payments made in respect of the maintenance of a
child, a spouse or a former spouse under a separation
agreement or pursuant to an order of a court of com-petent jurisdiction, less the amount of any relief fromincome tax which may be claimed in respect of suchpayments,
(vii) such other deduction as may be prescribed, under
regulations made under section 36 , for the purposes
of this paragraph;
(b) subject to paragraphs 3 and 4, in relation to cash assets,
means borrowings incurred specifically for the purchaseof the asset concerned to the extent that such amount hasnot been repaid and in respect of which borrowings theExecutive is satisfied that the purpose of incurring theborrowings was for the purpose of acquiring the assetconcerned, and
(c) subject to paragraphs 3 and 4, in relation to relevant assets,
means borrowings incurred specifically for the purchase,repair or improvement of the relevant asset concerned tothe extent that such amount has not been repaid, and inrespect of which borrowings the Executive is satisfiedthat the purpose of incurring the borrowings was for thepurpose of the purchase, repair or improvement of therelevant asset concerned;
“assessed weekly means” means the aggregate of—
(a) weekly assessed income,
(b) weekly assessed cash assets, and
(c) assessed weekly value of relevant assets,
computed in accordance with, as appropriate, Part 1 orPart 2 of
this Schedule;[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
“business” means a business carried on in the exercise of a trade,
profession or vocation, but does not include a business carried onotherwise than for gain;
“cash assets” means—
(a) monies, whether held as currency or in an account with a
financial institution,
(b) monies lent to another person which are repayable,
(c) shares, stocks, bonds, securities, and other financial instru-
ments, and
(d) a transferred asset which is a cash asset,
in which in the case of an asset referred to in paragraphs (a) to(c)
the person concerned has a beneficial interest and in the case ofan asset referred to in paragraph (d) the person concerned had a
beneficial interest;
“estimated market value” means—
(a) subject to paragraphs (b) and (c), the price the asset con-
cerned would fetch on the open market on the date onwhich the application for State support is made subjectto such conditions as might reasonably be calculated toobtain for the vendor of the asset the best price of theasset,
(b) in the case of a cash asset which comprises monies, the
amount of such monies, converted to the currency of theState in the case where such monies are not held in thecurrency of the State, at the official conversion rate speci-fied by the Central Bank of Ireland on the date the appli-cation for State support is made, and
(c) in the case of an asset not situated in a place the currency
of which place is the currency of the State, by convertingthe value of such asset in the currency of the place wherethe asset is situated into the currency of the State at theofficial conversion rate specified by the Central Bank ofIreland on the date the application for State support ismade;
“family successor” means a partner or relative of the person applying
for State support, which person, at the time of the application forState support—
(a) in the case of a farm, regularly and consistently applies a
portion of his or her working day in farming the farm, or
(b) in the case of a business, regularly and consistently applies
a portion of his or her working day in the carrying on ofthe relevant business;
“farm” means agricultural land, pasture and woodland, crops, trees
and underwood growing thereon, farm buildings appropriate to theproperty and farm machinery, livestock and bloodstock thereon butexcluding all residential property;
61Sch. 1Sch. 1
62[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
“farming” includes dairy farming, livestock production, and the culti-
vation of grass, tillage, and other crops, including horticultural cropswhether under protected cropping conditions or in the open;
“general assets deductible amount”—
(a) in the case of a person who is not a member of a couple,
means—
(i)\36,000, or
(ii) the amount prescribed, under regulations made under
section 36 , for the purposes of this subparagraph,
whichever is the greater, and
(b) in the case of a couple, means—
(i)\72,000, or
(ii) the amount prescribed, under regulations made under
section 36 , for the purposes of this subparagraph,
whichever is the greater;
“income” means—
(a) income from an employment, trade, profession or
vocation,
(b) rental income whether arising in the State or otherwise,
(c) income from holding of an office or directorship,
(d) income from a pension (whether under the social welfare
code or otherwise),
(e) income whether in the nature of a benefit or allowance
arising from social welfare, social insurance or othersources of a similar character,
(f) income from fees, commissions, dividends, interest, or
income of a similar character,
(g) payments under a settlement, covenant, estate or a pay-
ment in respect of maintenance,
(h) income from royalties and annuities,
(i) transferred income of a character described in paragraphs
(a)to(h), and
(j) such other forms of benefit as may be prescribed, under
regulations made under section 36 , for the purposes of
this paragraph,
whether in money or monies worth and arising within the State or
otherwise;
“minimum retained income threshold” means—
(a) for the purposes of the assessment of a person who is not a
member of a couple, 20 per cent of the maximum weekly[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
amount of State pension (Non-Contributory) at the date
of the application for State support,
(b) for the purposes of the assessment of a couple, the
maximum weekly amount of State pension (Non-Contributory) together with 20 per cent of the maximumweekly amount of State pension (Non-Contributory) atthe date of the application for State support;
“principal residence” means the principal private residence of a per-
son and includes land which the person has for his or her own occu-pation and enjoyment with that residence as its garden or grounds upto an area (exclusive of the dwelling house) not exceeding one acre;
“relevant assets” means all forms of property whether situated in the
State or not other than cash assets, including, options and incorpor-eal property generally in which the relevant person has a beneficialinterest including transferred assets which would have been relevantassets if not transferred;
“relevant business” means—
(a) the business or an interest in a business carried on by a
sole trader or by a partnership, including any land, build-ing, machinery or plant used wholly or mainly for thepurpose of the business, or
(b) the unquoted shares in or securities of a company carrying
on a business in which the applicant or his or her partnerhas until the onset of the sudden illness or disabilitywhich caused that person to require care services beenactively involved in carrying on the business;
“transferred asset” means an interest of the person in an asset
(whether a cash asset or a relevant asset) which has been transferredat any time in the period of 5 years prior to the date on which anapplication for State support is first made by or on behalf of thatperson which transfer is made—
(a) for no consideration,
(b) for nominal consideration, or
(c) for consideration which is less than 75 per cent of the esti-
mated market value of the interest of the person in theasset at the time of the transfer but does not include thetransfer of an asset made in respect of the settlement ofany claim made in respect of the maintenance of a childor other matrimonial proceedings, and that the Executiveis satisfied that such transfer was made for that purpose,
and the estimated market value of a transferred asset shall be deter-
mined on the basis of the value of the asset at the time of thetransfer, and where the asset comprises monies not being in the cur-rency of the State, or other assets held in a place outside the State,the currency of which is not the currency of the State, converted intothe currency of the State at the date of the transfer of the assetconcerned;
“transferred asset value”, in relation to a transferred asset, means
the amount calculated by the application of the following formula:
M V–C R
63Sch. 1Sch. 1
64[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
where—
MV is the estimated market value of the asset concerned at
the time of the transfer,
CR is the amount of the consideration received by the person
or the estimated market amount of the considerationreceived by the person (whichever is the higher);
“transferred income” means any income which the person whose
means is being assessed would have been entitled to receive in theassessable period, but which by reason of a particular action havingbeen taken by or on behalf of that person, a person other than theperson whose means are being assessed has received, is receiving orwill receive an amount of money or monies worth (whether by wayof a single payment or a series of payments) and which action by theperson whose means are being assessed occurred within 5 years ofthe date of first application for State support but does not includepayments made in respect of the maintenance of a child, a spouseor a former spouse under a maintenance agreement, a separationagreement or pursuant to an order of a court of competentjurisdiction;
“unquoted” in relation to any shares or securities, means not quoted
on a recognised stock exchange.
2. In relation to the definition of “allowable deduction”, as
respects income, a deduction shall be allowed in respect of eitherparagraph (a)(iv)(I) orparagraph (a)(iv)(II) of that definition, but
not both.
3. Where in relation to a cash asset or a relevant asset a deduction
is claimed as an allowable deduction by reason of borrowings relatingto such asset as permitted by paragraphs 3 and 4ofPart 1 orPart 2 ,
an allowance in respect of such borrowings may not be given whereto do so would permit a deduction in relation to the same indebted-ness more than once.
4. Where in relation to a cash asset or a relevant asset a deduction
is claimed as an allowable deduction by reason of borrowings relatingto such asset as permitted by paragraphs 3 and 4ofPart 1 orPart 2,
and such indebtedness applies to more than one person whetherjointly or severally, the amount of such indebtedness which may beallowed as an allowable deduction shall be proportionate to the pro-portion of the value of the interest of the person in respect of whomthe financial assessment is being carried out bears to the estimatedmarket value of the entire asset concerned.
5. It shall be presumed, unless the Executive is satisfied that it is
not the case, that where there is more than one person with aninterest in an asset that each owner has an equal interest in theasset concerned.
6. The interest of a person in a principal residence, or in a trans-
ferred asset which qualifies as a principal residence, shall not be orshall cease to be a relevant asset where the person concerned isreceiving or has received—
(a) care services,
(b) transitional care services within the meaning of section 13 ,[2009.] [ No.15.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
(c) services in a nursing home which services would, if they
had been provided after the coming into operation of thedefinition of “approved nursing home”, have come withinthe meaning of the definition of “long-term residentialcare services”, or
(d) any combination of the services referred to in paragraphs
(a)to(c),
for a period of 3 years (which period need not be continuous).
7. Subject to paragraphs 8 and 9, the interest of a person in a farm
or relevant business shall not be or shall cease to be a relevant assetwhere the person concerned is receiving or has received—
(a) care services,
(b) transitional care services within the meaning of section 13 ,
(c) services in a nursing home which services would, if they
had been provided after the coming into operation of thedefinition of “approved nursing home”, have come withinthe meaning of the definition of “long-term residentialcare services ”,o r
(d) any combination of the services referred to in subparag-
raphs (a)t o( c), for a period of 3 years (which period
need not be continuous).
8.Paragraph 7 shall not apply unless—
(a) the person receiving care services has suffered a sudden
illness or disability which caused that person to requirecare services, and
(b) a substantial part of the working day of the person requir-
ing care services or his or her partner was regularly andconsistently applied to the farming of the farm or carryingon of the relevant business until the onset of the suddenillness or disability, and
(c) a family successor certifies in writing that he or she will
on a consistent and regular basis apply a substantial partof his or her working day to the farming of the farm orcarrying on of the relevant business.
9.Paragraph 7 shall apply to a relevant asset which is a trans-
ferred asset and which is a farm or relevant business.
10. ( a)Subparagraph (b ) applies only in a case where the person
(“relevant person”) was a member of a couple, and—
(i) the other member of the couple (“other member”)
received both services of any kind referred to inparagraph 6 and financial support, and
(ii) the principal residence concerned is the same princi-
pal residence as the principal residence assessedunder the financial assessment of the other member.
(b) The total of the amounts of the weekly assessed means
under this Act which relate to the principal residence,arising pursuant to the financial assessment relating to
65Sch. 1Sch. 1
Section 16.
66[No.15.] [2009.] Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act
2009 .
the other member and the financial assessment relating
to the relevant person, when aggregated, shall not exceedthe amount which is 15 per cent of the estimated marketvalue of that residence at the date of valuation of theasset in connection with the first financial assessment ofthe relevant person less allowable deductions applicableto that asset, and on that threshold being reached, not-withstanding any other provision of this Schedule theasset shall cease to be a relevant asset.
11. Where in relation to a person an asset is a transferred asset
such asset shall not cease to be a transferred asset where—
(a) the person makes a subsequent application for State sup-
port, or
(b) a review is carried out under this Act of the means of the
person or his or her partner,
by reason of the date of such subsequent application or review being
more than 5 years after the transfer of the asset occurred.
SCHEDULE 2
Adjustment and Manner of Calculation of Amounts
Repayable in Respect of Ancillary State Support
1. Monies advanced by the Executive pursuant to ancillary State
support in a year shall be aggregated and the consumer price indexnumber which relates to mid-December in that year shall be takento be the base figure in respect of those payments.
2. The procedure set out in paragraph 1 shall be followed in
respect of each subsequent year in which payments pursuant to ancil-lary State support are made.
3. The amount established under paragraphs 1 and 2shall be
adjusted to take account of changes in the consumer price indexnumber.
4. On the happening of a relevant event or a deferred relevant
event, as the case requires, the Executive shall calculate the aggre-gate of the amounts due in respect of each year, having adjusted theamounts advanced in accordance with paragraphs 1 to3taking
account of changes in the consumer price index number up to andincluding the month immediately preceding the month in which therelevant event or deferred relevant event occurred.
5. In this Schedule, “consumer price index number” means the
All Items Consumer Price Index Number compiled by the CentralStatistics Office.