————————
Number 16of2009
————————
AVIATION (PRECLEARANCE) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Interpretation.
2. Minister may designate preclearance area.3. Duties of traveller.4. Right of traveller to withdraw.5. Functions of preclearance officers.6. Functions of Irish law enforcement officers.7. Security of preclearance area.8. Seizure of goods generally.
9. Seizure of goods: certain powers of Revenue Commissioners.
10. Seizure of goods: proceedings.11. In-transit preclearance: where traveller is refused permission
to enter.
12. In-transit preclearance: control of aliens.13. Privileges and immunities.14. Fees for preclearance.15. Expenses.16. Regulations.17. Offences and penalties.18. Offences by bodies corporate.19. Repeal of Air Navigation and Transport (Preinspection)
Act 1986.
12[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
20. Amendment of Third Schedule to Freedom of Information
Act 1997.
21. Short title and commencement.
SCHEDULE
Agreement between the Government of Ireland and the
Government of the United States of America on Air Transport
Preclearance
————————
Acts Referred to
Air Navigation and Transport (Amendment) Act 1998 1998, No. 24
Air Navigation and Transport (Preinspection) Act 1986 1986, No. 18Aliens Act 1935 1935, No. 14Consular Conventions Act 1954 1954, No. 10Firearms and Offensive Weapons Act 1990 1990, No. 12Firearms Acts 1925 to 2007Freedom of Information Act 1997 1997, No. 13Immigration Act 2004 2004, No. 1————————
Number 16of2009
————————
AVIATION (PRECLEARANCE) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO GIVE EFFECT TO AN AGREEMENT ENTERED
INTO BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF IRELANDAND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OFAMERICA RELATING TO THE PROVISION OF PRE-CLEARANCE OPERATIONS AT AIRPORTS IN THESTATE FOR PERSONS TRAVELLING BY AIR TO THEUNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DONE AT WASH-INGTON ON 17 NOVEMBER 2008, TO GIVE THE MINI-STER FOR TRANSPORT POWER TO MAKE REGU-LATIONS, INCLUDING REGULATIONS DESIGNATINGAREAS AT AIRPORTS WITHIN WHICH PRECLEAR-ANCE OPERATIONS MAY BE CARRIED OUT, TOPROVIDE FOR CONFERRING CERTAIN LIMITEDFUNCTIONS ON PRECLEARANCE OFFICERS WITHINTHOSE AREAS, TO PROVIDE FOR THE SEIZURE ANDFORFEITURE OF GOODS NOT DULY DECLARED ANDTO REPEAL THE AIR NAVIGATION AND TRANSPORT(PREINSPECTION) ACT 1986, TO AMEND THE FREE-DOM OF INFORMATION ACT 1997 AND TO PROVIDEFOR RELATED MATTERS.
[8th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—(1) In this Act—
“Agreement” means the agreement between the Government of
Ireland and the Government of the United States of America on AirTransport Preclearance, done at Washington on 17 November 2008,the text of which, for convenience of reference, is set out in theSchedule;
“air carrier” means an air transport undertaking, whether scheduled
or charter, that operates a non-stop air travel service between theState and the United States, whether that service originates in theState or elsewhere;
“aircraft” means an aircraft intended to be flown to the United States
following preclearance and includes, where applicable, a privateaircraft;
3
Interpretation.S.1
4[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
“aircraft commander” means the person serving on a private aircraft
who has command of its operation and navigation;
“airport authority” means the body responsible for the management,
operation and development of an airport at which preclearanceservices are provided in accordance with this Act;
“goods” includes personal effects, baggage, aircraft stores, equip-
ment, food, animals and plants and their products, any substance,currency and other monetary instruments, and documents in anyform (including electronic form);
“in-transit preclearance” means the preclearance of travellers, their
goods, and the aircraft concerned that arrive in the State from a stateother than the State en route to the United States;
“Irish law enforcement officer” means a member of An Garda Sı ´och-
a´na or an officer of Customs and Excise;
“Minister” means the Minister for Transport;“permission to enter” means permission under this Act by a preclear-
ance officer—
(a) to a traveller, to enter the United States, and in respect of
the traveller’s goods, to take them to the United States,and
(b) in respect of an aircraft, to enter the United States;
“possession”, in relation to possession of any goods or weapon by a
person, includes control over any goods or weapon;
“preclearance” means the procedure of conducting at an airport in
the State by a preclearance officer of all or any of the examinationand inspection required in respect of—
(a) a traveller seeking entry into the United States,
(b) the goods of such traveller intended to be taken into the
United States, and
(c) the aircraft concerned;
“preclearance area”—
(a) means a place designated by the Minister under section
2(1) (including any bridge designed to facilitate the
boarding of an aircraft from such a place), and
(b) includes a vehicle while conveying travellers to or from a
preclearance area and the aircraft or another part of thepreclearance area;
“preclearance facility” means the physical inspection infrastructure
in the preclearance area, including any offices and examination areastogether with any equipment required for the purposes of this Act;
“preclearance officer” means a United States Customs and Border
Protection official authorised by this Act to perform the functionsconferred by this Act;[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
“private aircraft” means an aircraft intended to be flown to the
United States that is not operated by an air carrier;
“postclearance” means the examination and inspection of travellers,
their goods and the aircraft concerned, upon arrival in the UnitedStates;
“traveller” means a passenger or member of the crew of an aircraft
seeking entry to the United States under this Act and includes anaircraft commander;
“United States” means the United States of America, its Govern-
ment and any agency of the United States associated with preclear-ance operations in Ireland, including United States Customs andBorder Protection;
“weapon” means a firearm within the meaning of the Firearms Acts
1925 to 2007, or a knife within the meaning of section 9(1) of theFirearms and Offensive Weapons Act 1990, or a weapon of offencewithin the meaning of section 10(2) of that Act.
(2) Subject to subsection (1) , a word or expression used in this
Act that is also used in the Agreement has the same meaning in thisAct as it has in the Agreement.
(3) In this Act a reference to preclearance, or preclearance area,
includes a reference to in-transit preclearance, or in-transit preclear-ance area, as the case may be.
2.—(1) The Minister may, by regulations, designate, by reference
to a map or otherwise, a place or places within an airport in the Stateas an area (“preclearance area”) or areas within which preclearancemay be carried out.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , regulations made under this section
may provide that—
(a) a part of a preclearance area may cease to be operational
when no aircraft at that part of the preclearance area is,for the time being, subject to preclearance, or
(b) a building, or a portion of a building, in a preclearance
area may cease to be operational when that building, orthat portion of the building, is, for the time being, notbeing used for the purpose of preclearance.
(3) Where regulations are made to which subsection (2) applies,
the airport authority, shall, during periods when that part of the pre-clearance area or building (or portion thereof) is operational, placesignage in prominent positions, or otherwise indicate that preclear-ance is, for the time being, being carried out in that part of the pre-clearance area or building (or portion thereof), as the case may be.
(4) Where the Minister designates a preclearance area under sub-
section (1) and that area includes a building consisting of more than
one floor, the Minister may designate—
(a) the entire building,
(b) an entire floor, or
(c) a portion of a floor.
5S.1
Minister may
designatepreclearance area.S.2
Duties of traveller.
Right of traveller to
withdraw.
Functions of
preclearanceofficers.
6[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(5) Before making regulations under this section, the Minister
shall consult with the airport authority, with the Minister for Justice,Equality and Law Reform, and with the Revenue Commissioners.
(6) In this section—
“floor” includes a basement and any connections between floors
concerned;
“map” includes a plan of a building;“operational” means operational for the purpose of preclearance.
3.—(1) A traveller who enters a preclearance area shall—
(a) present himself or herself without delay at the preclear-
ance facility for the purpose of applying for permissionto enter,
(b) make an accurate written declaration of all goods required
to be declared in accordance with instructions issued byor on behalf of the Minister and made available to thetraveller in the preclearance area, and
(c) comply with any requirement of an Irish law enforcement
officer or a preclearance officer under section 7(2) .
(2) A traveller who contravenes paragraph (a) ,(b)or(c)ofsub-
section (1) shall be guilty of an offence.
(3) Where a traveller is accused of an offence under subsection
(2)in respect of subsection (1)(b) , it shall be a good defence to show
that he or she had reasonable grounds for believing that his or herdeclaration was duly made in accordance with that provision.
(4) Where section 5(5)(a) applies, no proceedings shall be
instituted against a traveller under subsection (2) in respect of subsec-
tion (1)(b) in relation to any particular goods.
4.—A traveller may, at any time—
(a) withdraw his or her application for permission to enter,
and
(b) subject to subsections (1)(e) and (3)ofsection 5 , and
section 6 , leave the preclearance area.
5.—(1) In addition to exercising functions under section 7(2) ,a
preclearance officer may—
(a) take and process applications for permission to enter,
(b) ask for the production of travel documents and other
documents supporting the traveller’s application for per-mission to enter and examine such documents whenproduced,
(c) ask questions relating to the traveller’s eligibility to enter
the United States,[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(d) with the consent of the traveller and subject to subsection
(2), search such traveller and his or her goods,
(e) without warrant, where he or she reasonably suspects that
a person poses an immediate threat (including the pos-session of a weapon) to the safety of officers or otherpersons in the preclearance area, search such person andhis or her goods and may detain the person for such timeas is reasonably necessary for carrying out the search,
(f) examine any area of the aircraft, including any goods on,
or to be loaded onto, it,
(g) grant permission to enter to any traveller or aircraft where
such traveller or aircraft is found to be eligible for entryinto the United States,
(h) review or revoke permission to enter granted under para-
graph (g) ,
(i) refuse permission to enter to any traveller or aircraft
where such traveller or aircraft is found to be ineligiblefor entry into the United States,
(j) notwithstanding the fact that permission to enter has not
been granted to any traveller, permit such traveller toboard the aircraft for the purpose of postclearance onarrival in the United States, and
(k) request the assistance of an Irish law enforcement officer
with respect to the matters referred to in paragraphs (e)
and (f)of this subsection and paragraphs (a) and (b)of
section 6(1) .
(2) Where subsection (1)(d) applies, the preclearance officer con-
ducting a search of a person shall—
(a) be of the same sex as the person being searched, and
(b) have due respect for the person being searched.
(3) Where a preclearance officer reasonably suspects that—
(a) a person has—
(i) committed an indictable offence under the law of the
State, or
(ii) obstructed or attempted to obstruct a preclearance
officer in the performance of his or her functionsunder this Act,
or
(b) a private aircraft is conveying goods in contravention of
the law of the State,
the preclearance officer—
(I) may, without warrant, detain that person or private air-
craft, and
7S.5S.5
Functions of Irish
law enforcementofficers.
8[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(II) where such person or aircraft is detained, shall forthwith
deliver that person or aircraft into the custody of an Irishlaw enforcement officer to be dealt with in accordancewith law.
(4) Where a traveller fails to comply with section 3(1)(b) , the pre-
clearance officer may detain such goods and, where he or she doesso, shall forthwith deliver them to an Irish law enforcement officerfor the purposes of sections 8 to10.
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (4) , the preclearance officer may,
as a condition of granting permission to enter, require a travellerto—
(a) pay him or her, or another preclearance officer identified
by him or her, a sum of money equivalent to the sum ofmoney that would be payable by that traveller on post-clearance in respect of any particular goods, or
(b) surrender those goods.
(6) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , a preclearance officer may per-
form the functions conferred by this Act solely within thepreclearance area.
(b) Where regulations are made to which section 2(2) applies,
a preclearance officer may perform the functions con-ferred solely in a place referred to in that subsection thatis, for the time being, operational for the purpose of pre-clearance.
(7) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as permitting a pre-
clearance officer to be in possession of a weapon in the performanceof his or her functions under this Act.
6.—(1) An Irish law enforcement officer who reasonably suspects
that, in the preclearance area—
(a) a traveller has failed to comply with section 3(1)(b) ,o r
(b) any person (whether or not a traveller) is in possession of
any goods (including a weapon) the possession of, or theexport of which, is controlled or prohibited in the State,or otherwise poses a threat to the safety of officers orother persons in the preclearance area,
may, without warrant—
(i) search the person and, if he or she considers it necessary
for that purpose, detain the person for such time as isreasonably necessary for carrying out the search, pro-vided that—
(I) except where the threat posed is immediate—
(A) the officer conducting a search of a person being
detained shall ensure, so far as practicable, thatthe person understands the reason for thesearch and that it is conducted with due respectfor the person being searched,[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(B) a person being detained shall not be searched by
an officer or person of the opposite sex, and
(II) where a search of a person being detained involves
removal of clothing, other than headgear or a coat,jacket, glove or similar article of clothing, no officeror person of the opposite sex shall be present, unlesseither that person is a medical practitioner desig-nated by the officer conducting the search, or theofficer considers that the presence of that person isnecessary for the protection of the person carryingout the search, or is otherwise expedient in theinterests of the person being searched, and
(ii) examine (by opening or otherwise), seize and detain any-
thing found in the course of a search under this sectionthat appears to him or her to be something that might berequired as evidence in proceedings for an offence.
(2) Where an Irish law enforcement officer decides to search a
person under this section, he or she may require the person toaccompany him or her to such other place at the airport as may bespecified by the officer for the purpose of being so searched at that
other place.
(3) Where there is a failure to comply with a requirement under
subsection (2) , the Irish law enforcement officer concerned may
arrest without warrant the person of whom the requirement wasmade.
(4) Where a person fails to comply with a requirement under this
section, he or she shall be guilty of an offence.
(5) A requirement mentioned in subsection (2) shall remain in
force until the search in relation to which it is made is completed,but such search shall be carried out as soon as is practicable.
(6) Nothing in this section shall operate to prejudice any power
to search, or to seize or detain any goods, which may be exercisedby an Irish law enforcement officer apart from this section.
(7) An Irish law enforcement officer shall, where requested under
section 5(1)(k) , assist a preclearance officer.
7.—(1) Persons other than—
(a) preclearance officers and other personnel authorised by
the United States,
(b) travellers,
(c) Irish law enforcement officers, and
(d) persons authorised by the airport authority who require
entry for a purpose relating to their employment,
shall not enter—
(i) a preclearance area, or
9S.6
Security of
preclearance area.S.7
10[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(ii) where regulations are made to which section 2(2) applies,
a place referred to in that subsection that is, for the timebeing, operational for the purpose of preclearance.
(2) An Irish law enforcement officer or a preclearance officer
may, in the interest of security or the proper functioning of the pre-clearance area, do any of the following in the preclearance area:
(a) require any person to:
(i) give his or her name and to produce evidence of his
or her identity;
(ii) state the purpose of his or her being in the preclear-
ance area;
(iii) account for any baggage or other property which may
be in his or her possession;
(iv) return to the preclearance facility;
(b) require any of the following persons to leave the preclear-
ance area:
(i) a person who fails to give his or her name or to
produce evidence of his or her identity;
(ii) a person who fails to state the purpose of his or her
being in the preclearance area;
(iii) a person who fails to account for any baggage or other
property in his or her possession;
(iv) a person who gives a name or states a purpose for his
or her being in the preclearance area which isknown, or is reasonably suspected, by the preclear-ance officer or the Irish law enforcement officer tobe false;
(v) a person whom he or she knows not to have, or whom
he or she reasonably suspects of not having, a lawfulreason for being in the preclearance area.
(3) A person who contravenes subsection (1) or fails to comply
with a requirement under subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) A person who obstructs or impedes a preclearance officer or
an Irish law enforcement officer in the exercise of any functions con-ferred by this Act shall be guilty of an offence.
(5) A person shall not be convicted under—
(a)subsection (3) in respect of subsection (2) of this section,
and
(b)section 3(2) in respect of section 3(1)(c) ,
in respect of the same act.[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
8.—(1) Without prejudice to any other applicable law, any goods
that are—
(a) not declared, or
(b) the subject of a false declaration,
under section 3(1)(b) may be seized as liable to forfeiture by an Irish
law enforcement officer.
(2) Where goods are seized under subsection (1) , the person
affected shall be furnished with a notice in writing (“notice ofseizure”) specifying—
(a) the goods seized,
(b) the reasons for the seizure, and
(c) the procedure for making a claim against the seizure.
(3) A person whose goods have been seized under subsection (1)
who claims that such goods are not liable to forfeiture (“claimant”),shall, within one month of the seizure, give notice in writing of suchclaim (“notice of claim”) to the Revenue Commissioners.
(4) A notice of claim shall specify the name and address of the
claimant and, in the case of a claimant who is outside the State, thename and address of a solicitor in the State who is authorised toaccept service of any document required to be served on the claimantand to act on behalf of the claimant.
(5) If, on the expiration of the period referred to in subsection
(3), no notice of claim has been given, the goods shall be deemed to
have been duly condemned as forfeited.
(6) Where goods are, under this Act, condemned or deemed to
have been condemned as forfeited, the forfeiture shall have effect asfrom the date of seizure.
9.—(1) Where a notice of claim has been duly given, the Revenue
Commissioners may, as they think fit and notwithstanding that thegoods seized have not yet been condemned—
(a) deliver them up to the claimant on payment to the
Revenue Commissioners of such sum as they thinkproper, being a sum not exceeding that which, in theiropinion, represents the value of the goods, or
(b) if the goods seized are in the opinion of the Revenue Com-
missioners of a perishable or hazardous nature, sell ordestroy them.
(2) If, where any goods are delivered up, sold or destroyed under
this section, it is subsequently held by the court in proceedings thatthe goods were not liable to forfeiture at the time of seizure, theRevenue Commissioners shall on demand tender to such claimant—
(a) an amount equal to any sum paid by the claimant under
subsection (1)(a) ,
11Seizure of goods
generally.
Seizure of goods:
certain powers ofRevenueCommissioners.S.9
Seizure of goods:
proceedings.
12[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(b) if they have sold the goods, an amount equal to the pro-
ceeds of sale, or
(c) if they have destroyed the goods, an amount equal to their
value at the time of seizure.
(3) If the claimant accepts any amount tendered under subsection
(2), such claimant shall not be entitled to maintain proceedings in
any court on account of the seizure, sale or destruction of thegoods concerned.
(4) The Revenue Commissioners may, in their discretion, restore
any goods seized under this Act.
10.—(1) Subject to section 8(6) , where a notice of claim in respect
of any goods is given, the Revenue Commissioners shall take pro-ceedings for their condemnation by the court, and—
(a) where the court finds that the goods were not at the time
of seizure duly declared, the court shall condemn themas forfeited and,
(b) in any other case, the court shall order their release to
the claimant.
(2) Goods seized under this Act shall, after condemnation of such
goods, be forfeited to the Revenue Commissioners.
(3) Proceedings under subsection (1) shall be civil proceedings
and may be instituted either in the High Court or (if, in the opinionof the Revenue Commissioners, the value of the goods does notexceed the amount that is the monetary limitation on the jurisdictionof the District Court) the District Court.
(4) In any such proceedings the claimant or his or her solicitor
shall state on oath that the goods seized were, or were to the best ofhis or her knowledge and belief, the property of the claimant at thetime of the seizure.
(5) Where proceedings have been instituted or continued in the
name of an Irish law enforcement officer who has ceased for anyreason to be such an officer, or being such officer is absent at anytime during such proceedings, then such proceedings may be con-tinued in the name of any other officer, or of the officer so absent,as appropriate in the circumstances.
(6) In any proceedings under this section, if judgement is given
for the claimant, no Irish law enforcement officer or other personwho made or assisted in making the seizure shall be liable to anysubsequent civil or criminal proceedings on account of the seizure ofthe goods, provided that the court certifies that there was probablecause for making such seizure.
(7) In any civil or criminal proceedings against any Irish law
enforcement officer or other person on account of the seizure underthis Act of any goods, where—
(a) judgement is given against that officer or other person, and
(b) the court certifies that there was probable cause for such
seizure,[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
the claimant or other person shall not be entitled to—
(i) any damages, besides the goods seized or the value of such
goods, or
(ii) the costs of the proceedings,
and the Irish law enforcement officer or other person shall not be
liable for any punishment or penalty.
11.—(1) Where, on in-transit preclearance, a traveller is refused
permission to enter, the air carrier or the aircraft commander con-cerned shall be responsible for any costs (including, where necessary,the traveller’s accommodation and maintenance costs) arising fromthe removal of the traveller and his or her goods—
(a) to the state or other territory in which the traveller
boarded the aircraft, or
(b) where the traveller is not a citizen of that state or a resi-
dent of that state or territory, to the state or territory ofwhich the traveller is a citizen (in the case of a state) ora resident (in the case of a state or a territory).
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall prevent the air carrier or the
aircraft commander from recouping from the traveller in any courtof competent jurisdiction the costs expended pursuant to thatsubsection.
12.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , a person who lands at an air-
port in the State for the purposes of in-transit preclearance, shall not,for the purposes of the Aliens Act 1935 and the Immigration Act2004, be deemed to have arrived at a frontier of the State.
(2) A person who—
(a) lands at an airport in the State for the purposes of in-
transit preclearance, and
(b) is refused preclearance to travel onwards to the United
States,
shall be deemed, for the purposes of the Aliens Act 1935 and the
Immigration Act 2004, to have arrived at a frontier of the State.
13.—(1) A preclearance officer who is—
(a) a national of the United States, and
(b) assigned and posted to the State,
shall not be amenable to the jurisdiction of the judicial or administra-
tive authorities of the State in respect of acts performed by him orher in the exercise of his or her functions under this Act and shall,together with his or her dependants, enjoy such privileges as areagreed by an exchange of diplomatic notes.
(2) The immunity accorded under subsection (1) may be waived
in writing by the United States.
13S.10
In-transit
preclearance: wheretraveller is refusedpermission to enter.
In-transit
preclearance:control of aliens.
Privileges and
immunities.S.13
Fees for
preclearance.
Expenses.
Regulations.
14[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
(3) The immunity and privileges referred to in subsection (1) shall
not be accorded to a preclearance officer who is permanently resi-dent in the State.
(4) Without prejudice to any other power of a Minister of the
Government, where the Minister considers that a preclearanceofficer has abused his or her position, the Minister may, after consul-tation with the United States, require—
(a) in the case of a preclearance officer referred to in subsec-
tion (1) , the departure from the State of that preclearance
officer, or
(b) in the case of a preclearance officer who is permanently
resident in the State, that he or she cease to exercise hisor her functions under this Act.
(5) All documents (including information kept in a non-legible
form, whether stored electronically or otherwise, that is capable byany means of being reproduced in a legible form) of the UnitedStates located in the preclearance area shall be regarded as archiveskept at a consulate within the meaning of the Consular ConventionsAct 1954.
(6) An action shall lie against the State by a person who is pre-
cluded from taking an action by virtue of subsection (1) .
14.—Without prejudice to any other fee or charge that an airport
authority may duly impose, an airport authority may charge a fee toair carriers and aircraft commanders availing of preclearance.
15.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.
16.—(1) The Minister may make regulations—
(a) for any purpose in relation to which regulations are pro-
vided for in this Act, and
(b) generally for the purpose of giving effect to this Act and
to the Agreement,
and such regulations may contain such incidental, supplementary and
consequential provisions as appear to the Minister to be necessaryor expedient for the purposes of the regulations.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the Mini-
ster may make regulations for ensuring the integrity, security andproper functioning of—
(a) preclearance areas generally,
(b) a preclearance area at a particular airport, or
(c) a part of a preclearance area at a particular airport.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid by the
Minister before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may beafter it is made and, if a resolution annulling the regulation is passed[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
by either such House within the next 21 days on which that House
sits after the regulation is laid before it, the regulation shall beannulled accordingly but without prejudice to the validity of anythingpreviously done thereunder.
17.—(1) A person guilty of an offence under this Act (other than
an offence to which subsection (2) relates) shall be liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000, or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 6 months, or both.
(2) A person who assaults an Irish law enforcement officer (other
than a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na) or a preclearance officer in
the performance of his or her functions shall be guilty of an offenceand shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000,
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\25,000, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5
years, or both.
18.—Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body
corporate and is proved to have been committed with the consent orconnivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of,any director, manager, secretary or other officer of such body corpor-
ate or a person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, thatofficer or person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable tobe proceeded against and punished as if he or she were guilty of thefirst-mentioned offence.
19.—The Air Navigation and Transport (Preinspection) Act 1986
is repealed.
20.—The Third Schedule to the Freedom of Information Act 1997
is amended in Part I by inserting the following at the end of that Part:
“
1998, No. 24 Air Navigation and Transport Section 36
(Amendment) Act 1998
”.
21.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Aviation (Preclearance)
Act 2009.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose (including a particular airport,or part of an airport) or provision and different days may be soappointed for different purposes or different provisions.
15S.16
Offences and
penalties.
Offences by bodies
corporate.
Repeal of Air
Navigation andTransport(Preinspection) Act1986.
Amendment of
Third Schedule toFreedom ofInformation Act1997.
Short title and
commencement.16[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
SCHEDULE
Agreement between the Government of Ireland and the
Government of the United States of America on Air Transport
Preclearance
The GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND and the GOVERNMENT OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (hereinafter, “TheParties”),
CONSIDERING the benefits to Ireland and the United States of
preclearance in Ireland in respect of United States’ immigration, cus-toms, and other border controls and having regard to the success ofexisting arrangements in respect of preinspection introduced pursu-ant to the Agreement between Ireland and the United States ofAmerica on Preinspection signed at Dublin 25 June 1986 and sup-plemented by the agreement effected by an exchange of notes atWashington 31 March 1988,
AGREE as follows:
Article I
Definitions
1.“Air carrier” means any undertaking (meaning a business entity
or person) that provides air transport services for passengers pur-suant to a valid operating certificate or licence for remuneration,hire or other consideration;
2.“Air industry” means scheduled/charter Air carriers and, if
applicable, any Private aircraft owner/operator;
3.“Aircraft commander” means any person serving on a Private
aircraft who is in charge or has command of its operation andnavigation;
4.“Airport authority” means the body responsible for the manage-
ment, operation and development of an airport or airports atwhich Preclearance services are provided in accordance withthis Agreement;
5.“Eligible flight” means any commercial scheduled/charter flight,
including ferry flights (crew only), and any flight by Private air-craft, that has requested and been approved for Preclearanceservice;
6.“Goods” means personal effects, baggage, wares of any descrip-
tion, animals and plants and their products, currency and othermonetary instruments, and any document in any form;
7.“Ireland” means Ireland and its Government (including any
Government Department, Department official or other partyauthorized to act on behalf of the Irish State in relation to anyprovision of this Agreement);
8.“In-Transit Preclearance” means the Preclearance of passengers
and their Goods, as well as aircraft, coming from third countriesthat do not formally enter Ireland;
9.“In-Transit Preclearance area” means all or part of a Preclear-
ance area that is used for In-Transit Preclearance;[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
10.“Irish law enforcement officer” means a member of An Garda
Sı´ocha´na, and/or an Officer of Customs and Excise;
11.“Preclearance” means the procedure of conducting in the terri-
tory of one Party, all or any examination and/or inspectionrequired for entry/admission into the territory of the other Party;
12.“Preclearance area” means a designated, limited and oper-
ationally contiguous part of an airport within which Preclearanceoperations are effected in respect of individuals, Goods andaircraft;
13.“Preclearance facility” means the physical inspection infrastruc-
ture, to include any offices and examination areas as well as anyequipment required for the processing of passengers and theirGoods (including, where applicable, in-transit passengers andgoods).
14.“Preclearance officer” means a U.S. Customs and Border Pro-
tection (CBP) official authorized by Ireland to carry out Pre-clearance in Ireland.
15.“Private aircraft” means any aircraft engaged in a personal or
business flight which is not carrying passengers and/or cargo forcommercial purposes;
16.“Post clearance” means the clearance of aircraft, crew, passen-
gers and Goods upon arrival in the United States;
17.“Travellers” means any air passengers or crewmembers seeking
entry/admission to the United States using Preclearance;
18.“United States” means the United States of America, its
Government and/or any United States agency associated withPreclearance operations, and in particular CBP.
Article II
General
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as diminishing the
rights enjoyed by individuals under the Constitution and laws ofIreland and, where applicable, the United States.
2. Ireland shall designate areas at an airport in which Preclearance
is sought to be a “Preclearance area” or an “In-Transit Preclear-ance area.”
3. Before designating an area to be a Preclearance area, Ireland
shall consult with officials from the relevant Airport authority inorder to seek their recommendations on the precise location ofany Preclearance facility and, if applicable, In-Transit Preclear-ance facilities.
4. The Parties to this Agreement shall consult regarding, inter alia,
the proposed boundaries and location of any and all Preclearanceareas prior to formal designation by Ireland in accordance with
paragraph (2) of this Article.
5. The laws of Ireland shall at all times apply in Preclearance and
In-Transit Preclearance areas.
17Sch.Sch.
18[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
6. Ireland shall ensure that Travellers, Air carriers and Aircraft
commanders that wish to avail of Preclearance services in Irelandcan do so on condition that they recognise and consent to theright of the United States to grant or refuse Preclearance inaccordance with its laws.
7. In order to ensure the sterility of the Preclearance area, entry
shall be restricted to the following classes of person:
a. Preclearance officers and other U.S. personnel authorized
by CBP;
b. Travellers;c. Irish law enforcement officers acting in the course of their
duty; and
d. Personnel authorized by the Airport authority who require
entry for a purpose relating to their employment.
8. Travellers who enter a Preclearance area shall be required to
report and declare their Goods to a Preclearance officer withoutdelay for the purpose of enabling the Preclearance officer tocarry out his or her functions in accordance with this Agreement.
9. Subject to the provisions of Article IV of this Agreement, Travel-
lers who withdraw their application for Preclearance shall be freeto leave the Preclearance area at any time.
10. The Parties shall establish mutually acceptable standard
operating procedures concerning Preclearance, including, but notlimited to, protocols to apply to screening of aircraft, Travellersand/or their Goods, and may include protocols regarding In-Transit Preclearance procedures and on-board duty free sales,if applicable.
11. Nothing in this Agreement shall limit the right of Ireland to
refuse entry of persons into Ireland and to enforce, inter alia, any
existing or future laws relating to immigration, residence and/orprotection.
12. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the right of Ireland to
refuse permission to any aircraft to enter Irish airspace or landat an Irish airport. Nor shall any provision of this Agreement beconstrued as diminishing the right of Ireland to inspect and/orsearch any aircraft that lands on Irish territory.
13. Nothing in this Agreement changes or modifies the existing
domestic laws of the United States or affects the rights and obli-gations of the Parties under other international agreements ortreaties.
14. Nothing in this Agreement affects the authority of the United
States to apply and enforce its civil and criminal laws (includingany laws with extraterritorial effect) within its own territory.
15. Expenses incurred by the United States in the performance of
this Agreement shall be subject to applicable U.S. law andregulations.[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
Article III
Provision of Preclearance
1. The United States shall commence Preclearance services in
Ireland on the date of entry into force of this Agreement subjectto, and provided that:
a. A suitable Preclearance facility or facilities is/are being
made available;
b. The facility or facilities meet(s) CBP Airport Technical
Design Standards;
c. Standard operating procedures regarding the provision of
Preclearance and/or In-Transit Preclearance services inaccordance with Article II(10) have been established by theParties; and
d. The conditions in paragraph (5) of this Article have been
satisfied.
2. In developing or modifying its Preclearance facility requirements
applicable in Ireland, the United States shall consider the viewsof the local Air industry and Airport authorities and shall obtainthe consent of Ireland, which consent shall not be unreasonablywithheld.
3. Where modifications to Preclearance area and/or facilities are
required to achieve compliance with the requirement of one orboth Parties to this Agreement, the Party/Parties concerned shallconsult with the relevant Airport authority and agree such modi-fications and establish a reasonable time frame for implemen-tation of such modifications in consultation with the Airportauthority. Where agreement cannot be reached with the relevantAirport authority, the Party/Parties concerned shall refer thematter to the U.S./Ireland Preclearance Consultative Group pur-suant to Article XI of this Agreement.
4. In-Transit Preclearance procedures shall be considered and may
be adopted at any airport upon agreement of the Parties hereto.
5. The provision of Preclearance services at an Irish airport shall be
contingent upon:
a. The existence of sufficient traffic to make feasible the
efficient operation of the Preclearance facility;
b. The provision of adequate and appropriate security
arrangements, including law enforcement support inaccordance with Article IV(2), to ensure the safety of Pre-clearance officers, Travellers and airport personnel;
c. Adequate and appropriate security arrangements in respect
of the Preclearance facility to protect against intrusion ordamage and to protect the official archives and documentsheld at such facilities;
d. Each Airport authority establishing, implementing and
maintaining an acceptable plan for coordinating Air carrierand Aircraft commander requests for the Preclearance offlights; and
19Sch.Sch.
20[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
e. Each Airport authority permitting the installation and oper-
ation by the United States of such communications andinspection aids as are required.
6. Where an issue arises which may place Preclearance operations
at serious risk, the United States may request immediate consul-tations with the appropriate authorities in accordance withArticle XI. If the matter is not resolved by that forum within 30days, the matter shall be referred to the Parties for resolution.
7. Any decision to terminate Preclearance services at a Preclearance
location shall be a joint decision by written agreement of theParties, following consultation with the relevant Airport auth-ority and local Air industry, and shall be based upon relevantfactors, including national security interests and/or sustained andsubstantial decreases in air traffic.
Article IV
Ireland’s Obligations
1. Ancillary Powers
Ireland shall permit Preclearance officers to determine whether
to grant or refuse Preclearance to any aircraft and/or individualseeking Preclearance to the United States. In order to facilitatethe effective operation of Preclearance, Ireland shall permit Pre-clearance officers to exercise the following ancillary powerswithin the Preclearance area:
(a) Inspection
Preclearance officers shall be authorized by law to:
i. Conduct voluntary inspections and/or assessments
of individuals, as well as any Goods in their pos-session, seeking Preclearance for entry/admissioninto the territory of the United States;
ii. Examine any aircraft seeking Preclearance
(including all Goods in, or to be loaded onto, thesaid aircraft, as well as aircraft stores) with a viewto determining whether or not to grant Preclearancefor onward passage to the United States; and
iii. Request the assistance of An Garda Sı ´ocha´na or
another appropriate Irish law enforcement officerregarding the screening of any Traveller, aircraft orGoods for Preclearance purposes.
(b) Search
Preclearance officers shall be authorized by law to exercise
the following powers of search:
i. Subject to the consent of the person concerned, con-
duct personal searches (pat-down search, partialbody search and search of Goods) of any Travelleror other individual entering the Preclearance area;
ii. Conduct non-voluntary searches (immediate pat-
down search, partial body search and search of bag-gage and/or other personal effects) of any Traveller[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
or other individual entering the Preclearance area
reasonably suspected of carrying a weapon or ofposing an immediate threat to the safety of officersor other individuals in the Preclearance area. Inexercising this power, a Preclearance officer shalluse no more force than is reasonable in the circum-stances as he or she believes them to be; and
iii. Request the assistance of a member of An Garda
Sı´ocha´na and/or an Officer of Customs and Excise
to conduct a search of any person reasonably sus-pected of having made a false declaration or ofbeing in possession of an article, substance orGoods the possession and/or export of which is con-trolled or prohibited under Irish law and/or anyperson reasonably suspected of carrying a weaponor of otherwise posing a threat to the safety ofofficers or other individuals in the Preclearancearea.
(c) Detention
Preclearance officers shall be authorized by law to exercise
the following limited powers of detention:
i. Hold, pending the arrival of a member of An Garda
Sı´ocha´na and/or an Officer of Customs and Excise,
any Traveller or other individual reasonably sus-pected of having committed an indictable offenceunder Irish law, for a period no greater than isnecessary to obtain the above assistance;
ii. Hold, pending the arrival of a member of An Garda
Sı´ocha´na and for a period no greater than is neces-
sary to obtain Garda assistance, any Traveller orother individual reasonably suspected of havingobstructed or having sought to obstruct a Preclear-ance officer in the exercise of his or her powers andduties under this Agreement; and
iii. Hold, pending the arrival of a member of An Garda
Sı´ocha´na and/or an Officer of Customs and Excise,
and for a period no greater than is necessary toobtain such assistance, any Private aircraft reason-ably suspected of conveying or facilitating the con-veyance of Goods in violation of Irish law.
In exercising these powers, a Preclearance officer shall use
no more force than is reasonable in the circumstances ashe or she believes them to be.
(d) Collections, Seizure and Forfeiture
Without prejudice to the rights exercisable by An Garda
Sı´ocha´na and/or an Officer of Customs and Excise to seize
and retain items required as evidence in the prosecutionof an offence under Irish law and without prejudice to theright of the United States to request the transmission inaccordance with Irish law and applicable internationalagreements of any item of evidence required in the pros-ecution in the United States of an offence, Preclearanceofficers shall be authorized by law to exercise the follow-ing powers:
21Sch.Sch.
22[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
i. Take possession of any item the subject of a false
declaration or a failure to declare, where the pos-session and/or export of the item or items does notconstitute an offence under Irish law, and thereafterdeliver such items to an Irish law enforcementofficer for the purpose of seizure in accordance withIrish law;
ii. Request return of items held by Ireland after the
expiration of 6 weeks;
iii. Transfer said items to the United States;iv. Require, as a pre-condition to the grant of Preclear-
ance, the payment of a sum of money equivalent tothat which would constitute the applicable duty, tax,fee and/or penalty payable by an individualimporting into the United States those Goods oritems in the possession of the individual seekingPreclearance; and
v. Require, as a pre-condition to the grant of Preclear-
ance, the voluntary surrender of any Goods in thepossession of the individual the importation ofwhich into the United States is prohibited or regu-lated under the laws of the United States.
(e) Return to Preclearance facility
Without prejudice to the foregoing powers that may be
exercised by Preclearance officers within the Preclearancearea, where a Preclearance officer deems it necessary toreview a decision to grant Preclearance to a Traveller, heor she may request the individual to return to the Preclear-ance facility and, where necessary, may request the sup-port of An Garda Sı ´ocha´na to ensure that the individual
whose Preclearance status is under review does not boarda precleared flight or otherwise jeopardise or prejudice thestatus of a flight pre-cleared for entry into the UnitedStates.
2. Security
Ireland shall, through An Garda Sı ´ocha´na, provide appropriate
and sufficient law enforcement support as is required to maintainthe proper and effective functioning of Preclearance and toensure the security of the Preclearance area and safety of Pre-clearance officers, Travellers and airport staff. Security arrange-ments shall be reviewed by An Garda Sı ´ocha´na from time to
time as may be required. In conducting such reviews, An GardaSı´ocha´na shall take into account any representations made by the
United States.
3. Information and Training
The Parties shall mutually arrange for the provision of infor-
mation and training. Ireland shall, if requested, arrange for theprovision of information and/or training for Preclearance officersregarding the laws of Ireland relevant to the powers and dutiesexercised by Preclearance officers working in Ireland. The UnitedStates shall, if requested, provide information and/or training inaccordance with Article V(6).[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
4. Right of Redress
Ireland shall make such provision in law as is necessary to ensure
that any individual aggrieved by the unlawful exercise of powersassociated with the administration of Preclearance has an effec-tive right of redress in Ireland against the Government of Ireland.
5. Claim in respect of Goods seized
Ireland shall provide in law for a right, subject to such limitations
as will be imposed by law, to challenge the seizure of Goodsgrounded upon an alleged false declaration or failure to declarein the context of Preclearance.
Article V
United States’ Obligations and Authorities
in Respect of Preclearance Service
1. The United States shall provide a high level of service to those
availing of Preclearance in Ireland. In particular, the UnitedStates shall:
a. Provide a sufficient number of Preclearance officers to carry
out Preclearance operations with reasonable speed andefficiency;
b. Give due consideration to using flexible practices and/or
operating procedures which may improve the efficiency ofPreclearance operations or address temporary disruptions;
c. Use its best efforts to secure necessary resources for
additional staff and/or equipment that may be required inorder to maintain the efficient operation of Preclearance;
d. Give due consideration to adopting any recommendation
from the relevant Airport authority and/or Irish Air indus-try representatives to improve the efficiency of the Pre-clearance service; and
e. Provide at least 90 days’ notice to Ireland, the Airport auth-
ority and local Air industry of any reduction in Preclearanceservice at a given airport.
The Parties shall establish prior to the commencement of Pre-
clearance operations mutually acceptable standard operating pro-cedures that include procedures for implementing Paragraph 1 ofthis Article.
2. Preclearance authorization
The United States shall authorize Preclearance services for flights
in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Annex of thisAgreement.
3. The United States shall have the right:
a. To deny Preclearance to flights or any Traveller in any case
where authorized under its law;
b. To require Post clearance as it deems necessary of any air-
craft, Traveller or Goods on any flight;
23Sch.Sch.
24[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
c. To preclear Eligible flights only if Travellers can be routed
through the designated Preclearance area;
d. To decline to conduct Preclearance for any Air carrier or
aircraft until the Air carrier or Aircraft commander hassatisfied the Preclearance officers that it will deny carriageto anyone failing to submit to a Preclearance inspection,and to anyone who, having submitted to such inspection, isfound ineligible to board a precleared flight;
e. To deny in-transit privileges to any Air carrier or Aircraft
commander, which/who would not otherwise be authorizedby the United States’ civil aviation authorities to fly to theUnited States;
f. To refuse to preclear any Traveller and his/her Goods if the
Traveller does not satisfy the Preclearance officer thathe/she qualifies for Preclearance or that his/her Goods canbe lawfully imported into the United States; and
g. To refuse onward passage of any Traveller or Aircraft com-
mander on a flight subject to Preclearance who is deemedby a Preclearance officer to be inadmissible to the UnitedStates or who refuses to provide information relevant tohis/her immigration status.
4. Cooperation in relation to prevention and detection of offences
under Irish law
The United States shall, in the context of this Agreement, provide
all reasonable assistance to Ireland in relation to the preventionand detection of offences under Irish law. Without prejudice tothe generality of the foregoing, Preclearance officers shall exer-cise the powers afforded to them under Article IV of this Agree-ment in a manner consistent with this obligation and in particular:
a. Where during the course of an inspection, a Preclearance
officer discovers an item the possession and/or export ofwhich constitutes an offence under Irish law, he or she shallimmediately call for the assistance of an Irish law enforce-ment officer; and
b. Where a Preclearance officer has cause to detain an individ-
ual in accordance with the provisions of Article IV(1)(c),he or she shall, forthwith, deliver such person into the cus-tody of an Irish law enforcement officer.
5. Information Leaflets and Signage
The United States shall ensure that information provided by
Ireland, e.g., signage, brochures and/or other materials outliningthe rights and or obligations of Travellers availing of Preclearanceis readily available and/or visible.
6. The United States shall, if requested, arrange for the provision
of information and training for Irish law enforcement officers rel-evant to the processing and search of passengers seeking to beprecleared to the United States.[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
Article VI
In-Transit Preclearance
In-Transit Preclearance operations shall, upon agreement by the Par-
ties, be implemented at locations with existing Preclearance oper-ations established in accordance with this Agreement. Provisionsunder this Agreement applicable to Preclearance operations shallapply to any established In-Transit Preclearance operations.
Article VII
Role of Airport Authorities
Ireland shall use its best endeavours to ensure that the Airport auth-
orities for airports at which Preclearance is established pursuant tothis Agreement shall:
a. Permit the installation and operation by the United States
of such equipment as is required for the effective operationof Preclearance;
b. Ensure that each Preclearance area and, if applicable, each
In-Transit Preclearance area, is clearly demarcated;
c. Ensure that there will be no public access to the designated
Preclearance area by restricting access in accordance withArticle II(7) of this Agreement;
d. Post signage and make available information regarding the
rights and obligations of Travellers in the Preclearancearea;
e. If applicable and approved, provide adequate facilities for
the operation of In-Transit Preclearance;
f. Follow designated procedures regarding the advance notifi-
cation to the United States of the identity of any Privateaircraft requesting Preclearance (as per the Annex);
g. Consult with Preclearance officers regarding authorization
of personnel for the purposes of Article II(7)(d) of thisAgreement; and
h. Ensure any Goods, items and other products not eligible
for entry into the United States are not provided or madeavailable for sale in the Preclearance area or in the In-Transit Preclearance area.
Article VIII
Participation of Air Carriers and Aircraft Commanders
1. The United States shall permit each Air carrier and Aircraft com-
mander the option to use Preclearance or Post clearance forflights, subject to the following conditions:
a. Any Air carrier seeking approval for Preclearance services
for scheduled flights will be required to make such requestin writing no later than 60 days before the proposed com-mencement of service. All requests for Preclearance mustbe directed to the applicable representative of the United
25Sch.Sch.
26[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
States Port Director for the Preclearance facility. For
adjustments to Air carrier flight schedules, the UnitedStates shall require notice in accordance with paragraph (1)of the Annex;
b. Any Air carrier desiring to withdraw its scheduled oper-
ations entirely from Preclearance at any location will berequired to provide 90 days’ advance written notice to bothParties. However, if neither Party objects, the Air carriermay withdraw sooner. The United States may requirereasonable notice be provided to withdraw from Preclear-ance only in respect of one or more eligible routes;
c. Aircraft commanders will be required to comply with laws
governing their landing, entry and clearance in the UnitedStates. Ireland will endeavour to ensure that all Aircraftcommanders seeking Preclearance provide advance noticeof their departure from the territory of Ireland to the terri-tory of the United States in order to schedule Preclearanceservices (see the Annex); and
d. Air carriers shall inform Travellers of their rights and obli-
gations in respect of Preclearance.
2. Where In-Transit Preclearance is introduced in accordance with
the terms of this Agreement, Ireland shall use its best endeavoursto ensure that each airport with In-Transit Preclearance makesavailable the in-transit process to all Air carriers and Aircraftcommanders that have agreed to participate in the In-Transit Pre-clearance.
3. Cargo services (i.e., Preclearance of cargo) shall not be eligible
for Preclearance under this Agreement, except as otherwisemutually agreed upon between the Parties.
Article IX
Cost of Preclearance
The cost of Preclearance shall be borne as follows:
a. The United States, pursuant to its laws and regulations gov-
erning Preclearance, shall be responsible for its personneland operations costs (other than facility costs) of conductingPreclearance activities;
b. Consistent with Article V of this Agreement, for any Trav-
eller refused passage onward by the United States basedupon the authority of the United States, the Air carrier orthe Aircraft commander concerned shall be responsible forany costs, including, where necessary, accommodation andmaintenance costs arising from the removal to that individ-ual’s point of embarkation, or to the country of whichhe/she is a national;
c. The provision of the necessary Preclearance facilities shall
be the responsibility of the competent Airport authority;
d. Responsibility for the costs associated with Preclearance
service under subparagraphs (a) and (c), above, shall beallocated between the United States and the relevant Air-port authority in accordance with the CBP Airport Techni-cal Design Standards document;[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
e. The only fees levied by the United States on Travellers for
the provision of Preclearance services shall be the universalfees routinely sought by the United States from all individ-uals seeking clearance (including Post clearance) to enterthe United States.
Article X
Privileges and Immunities
1. Employees of the Government of the United States who are U.S.
nationals, assigned to Preclearance duties in Ireland under thisAgreement, except employees who are permanently resident inIreland, shall not be amenable to the jurisdiction of the judicialor administrative authorities of Ireland in respect of acts perfor-med by them in the exercise of their functions under thisAgreement.
2. The immunity accorded under paragraph (1) may be waived in
writing by the United States.
3. After consultation with the United States, Ireland may require
the departure of a Preclearance officer whom Ireland deems tohave abused his/her official position, or, with regard to a Pre-clearance officer who is permanently resident in Ireland, mayrequire that he/she cease exercise of his/her functions under thisAgreement.
4. Employees of the Government of the United States assigned to
Preclearance duties in Ireland pursuant to this Agreement,except employees who are permanently resident in Ireland, shall,together with their dependants, enjoy such privileges as areagreed between the Parties by an exchange of notes.
5. Official archives, including electronic files and documents, of the
United States located in the designated Preclearance area andfacility shall enjoy the same inviolability as consular archivesunder the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
Article XI
Consultations
1. Local airport mechanisms shall be used to address issues perti-
nent to a particular Preclearance location. Issues which cannotbe resolved at the local level shall be referred to the U.S./IrelandPreclearance Consultative Group.
2. The Parties shall establish a U.S./Ireland Preclearance Consulta-
tive Group consisting of representatives of each Party. TheU.S./Ireland Preclearance Consultative Group shall meet on aregular basis, at least annually, to review any issues related tothis Agreement.
a. Other interested groups, including the Air industry, may
attend portions of the U.S./Ireland Preclearance Consulta-tive Group meetings as mutually determined by the Parties.
b. The U.S./Ireland Preclearance Consultative Group shall
commence consultations within 20 days of the receipt of arequest by either Party to convene the consultative groupunless otherwise agreed among the members.
27Sch.Sch.
28[No. 16.] [2009.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
c. Where the U.S./Ireland Preclearance Group fails to resolve
a matter within 30 days from commencement of the consul-tations, unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, theaffected Party may request a meeting of the Parties to thisAgreement.
3. At any time, either Party may request consultations regarding
any portion of this Agreement. Such requests may include, butare not limited to, changes in domestic law or any other mattera Party considers may affect the interpretation, application orimplementation of this Agreement.
a. On matters which the requesting Party states are urgent,
such consultations between the Parties shall commencewithin 15 days of the date of the request.
b. Consultation on other issues shall commence within 30 days
of the request, unless otherwise agreed to between theParties.
4. Any disagreement between the Parties arising out of or relating
to this Agreement shall be resolved through consultationsbetween the Parties and shall not be submitted to any tribunal,court or other third party.
5. The Parties agree that if a competent court or tribunal of either
nation should determine that any Preclearance activity or oper-ation is contrary to the laws of either Party, the Parties shouldconsult on how to proceed.
Article XII
Annex
The Annex hereto constitutes an integral part of this Agreement.
Article XIII
Reciprocity
Should Ireland seek to establish Preclearance service at airports in
the United States of America, the Government of the United Statesshall consult with relevant authorities at U.S. airports which aremutually identified by the Parties to determine the feasibility anddetails of establishing reciprocal Preclearance service under theterms of this Agreement. Reciprocal Preclearance rights may beagreed to by the Parties in an amendment to this Agreement.
Article XIV
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the later
note in an exchange of diplomatic notes in which each Partyinforms the other that it considers the conditions of Article III(5)to have been met with respect to Preclearance services at an Irishairport and that it has completed its necessary internal pro-cedures for entry into force of the Agreement, including theenactment of any legislation required.
2. This Agreement and its Annex may be amended by written
agreement of the Parties. Upon entry into force, this Agreementshall supersede the Agreement between Ireland and the United[2009.] [ No. 16.] Aviation (Preclearance) Act 2009 .
States of America on Preinspection, signed at Dublin 25 June
1986, as supplemented by the agreement of 31 March 1988.
3. This Agreement shall continue in force unless terminated by
either Party by giving one year’s written notice to the other Party.
DONE in two originals at this day of
, 2008.
————————————— —————————————
For the Government For the Government of the
of Ireland United States of America
Annex
Coordination of Preclearance Services
1. Consistent with Article VIII and/or, if applicable, Article VI, for
Preclearance purposes, Airport authorities and Air carriers willbe required to notify the United States of any proposed seasonalschedules and new flights, no less than 60 days in advance oftheir implementation. Air carriers shall be required to providereasonable notice of subsequent, limited adjustments to their sea-sonal schedules.
2. The Parties will develop procedures to ensure adequate advance
notice of requests for the Preclearance of Private aircraft and Aircarriers operating non-scheduled flights departing Ireland for theUnited States.
3. The United States shall endeavour to accommodate all requests
for Preclearance service when such requests are made in the time-frames specified in paragraph (1) above and shall work with Air-port authorities and Air carriers to accommodate new flights andchanges in flight schedules. The United States will endeavour toaccommodate requests for Preclearance service in respect ofPrivate aircraft and Air carriers operating non-scheduled flightsin accordance with the joint procedures that are developed bythe Parties (as referred to in paragraph 2).
4. Consistent with Article XI, any request for Preclearance service
which is not resolved at the local level shall be referred to theU.S./Ireland Preclearance Consultative Group.
5. The United States, in its sole discretion, shall have the right to
determine on a case-by-case basis whether to provide Preclear-ance service to any irregular or ad hoc flights during mutually
agreed upon normal hours of operation when there has beeninsufficient coordination with the United States.
6. The United States shall have the right to determine on a case-by-
case basis whether to provide Preclearance service to flights out-side mutually agreed upon normal hours of operation.
29Sch.