————————
Number 2of2007
————————
CITIZENS INFORMATION ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definition.
2. Amendment of section 2(1) of Principal Act.3. Change of name of Board.4. Amendment of section 7 of Principal Act.5. Personal advocates.6. Amendment of section 9 of Principal Act.7. Amendment of section 11 of Principal Act.8. Amendment of section 23 of Principal Act.9. Directions to Board.
10. Short title, collective citation and commencement.
————————
12[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Comhairle Act 2000 2000, No. 1
Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 8Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003Disability Act 2005 2005, No. 14Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 14 & 15 Vic., c. 93Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 2005, No. 26————————
Number 2of2007
————————
CITIZENS INFORMATION ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND THE COMHAIRLE ACT 2000 TO
CHANGE THE NAME OF COMHAIRLE, SO THAT IT
SHALL BE KNOWN, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, ASTHE CITIZENS INFORMATION BOARD OR, IN THEIRISH LANGUAGE, AS AN BORD UM FHAISNE ´IS DO
SHAORA ´NAIGH, TO AMEND AND EXTEND ITS FUNC-
TIONS AND, IN PARTICULAR, TO CONFER A FUNC-TION ON IT TO PROVIDE, OR ARRANGE FOR THEPROVISION OF, A PERSONAL ADVOCACY SERVICETO CERTAIN PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, TO MAKECERTAIN CHANGES TO ITS MEMBERSHIP AND TOPROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[21st February , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act “Principal Act” means Comhairle Act 2000.
2.—Section 2(1) of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by the substitution of the following definition for the
definition of “Board”:
“ ‘Board’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 6, as
amended by section 3 of the Citizens Information Act
2007 ;”,
(b) by the substitution of the following definition for the
definition of “voluntary body”:
“ ‘voluntary body’ means—
(a) a body corporate, or
(b) an unincorporated body of persons,
other than a statutory body, and includes a body com-
monly known as a Citizen Information Service or a CitizenInformation Centre;”,
and
3Definition.
Amendment of
section 2(1) ofPrincipal Act.S.2
Change of name of
Board.
Amendment of
section 7 ofPrincipal Act.
4[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
(c) by the insertion of the following definitions:
“ ‘deciding officer’ has the meaning it has in section 2(1)
of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005;
‘the Director’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 7A;‘disability’, in relation to a person, means a substantial
restriction in the capacity of the person to carry on a pro-fession, business or occupation in the State or to partici-pate in social or cultural life in the State by reason of anenduring physical, sensory, mental health or intellectualimpairment;
‘Personal Advocacy Service’ has the meaning assigned to
it by section 7A;
‘personal advocates’ has the meaning assigned to it by
section 7A;
‘qualifying person’ has the meaning assigned to it by
section 7A;
‘social service’ means any service provided by a statutory
body or voluntary body that is available or accessible tothe public generally or a section of the public pursuant tostatute or otherwise and includes, but is not limited to, aservice in relation to any of the following, namely, health,social welfare, education, family support, housing, tax-ation, citizenship, consumer matters, employment andtraining, equality, asylum and immigration;”.
3.—(1) The name of Comhairle is hereby changed and, following
the passing of this Act, it shall be known, in the English language,as the Citizens Information Board or, in the Irish language, as AnBord um Fhaisne ´is do Shaora ´naigh.
(2) References in the Principal Act to the Board shall, following
the passing of this Act, be construed as references to the body estab-lished by section 6 of that Act whose name is changed by subsec-
tion (1) .
4.—Section 7 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by the substitution of the following para-
graphs for paragraphs ( b) and ( c):
“(b) to support the provision of or, where the Board
considers it appropriate, to provide directly,advocacy services to individuals, in particularthose with a disability, that would assist themin identifying and understanding their needsand options and in securing their entitlementsto social services,
(bb) to provide, or to arrange for the provision of, a
Personal Advocacy Service to qualifying per-sons and, in so doing, the Board shall takeaccount of the following:
(i) the financial resources of the Board; and[2007.] [ No. 2.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
(ii) whether qualifying persons can obtain
advocacy services otherwise than underthis Act,
(c) to support, promote and develop—
(i) greater accessibility, co-ordination and
public awareness of social services, and
(ii) the provision and dissemination of inte-
grated information in relation to suchservices by statutory bodies and volun-tary bodies,”;
and
(b) by the insertion of the following subsections after subsec-
tion (1):
“(1A) The Board shall, subject to the approval of the
Minister, determine the terms on which and the conditionssubject to which it may—
(a) support the provision of information, advice or
advocacy services under subsection (1), and
(b) provide financial or other resources to a volun-
tary body under subsection (1)( e) or to a body
specified by the Minister under subsection(1)(h),
and different terms and conditions may apply under para-
graphs ( a) and ( b) and in relation to different types of
bodies.
(1B) The Board shall, in determining the terms and
conditions under subsection (1A), have regard to theobjective of it promoting the provision of an integrated,reliable and comprehensive information service of thehighest quality.
(1C) The Board may, for the purpose of providing the
support referred to in paragraph ( a) of subsection (1A) or
the financial or other resources referred to in paragraph(b) of that subsection, request the body or person con-
cerned to furnish it with information in such form and atsuch times as it may require.
(1D) The Board may refuse to provide the support
referred to in paragraph ( a) of subsection (1A), or the fin-
ancial or other resources referred to in paragraph ( b)o f
that subsection, if the body or person concerned does notcomply with the terms and conditions determined underthat subsection or if it fails or refuses to furnish the Boardwith any information requested of the body or person con-cerned under subsection (1C).
(1E) The Board, in performing the functions conferred
on it by or under this section, shall have regard to the needfor it to co-operate with statutory bodies and voluntarybodies.”.
5S.4Personal advocates.
6[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
5.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the following
sections after section 7:
“Personal
AdvocacyService.7A.—(1) The Chief Executive may designate
such and so many members of the staff of theBoard as he or she considers appropriate to bepersonal advocates to qualifying persons(hereinafter referred to as ‘personal advocates’)and a person so designated shall hold office as apersonal advocate for such period as the ChiefExecutive may determine.
(2) A personal advocate shall have such qualifi-
cations, expertise and experience relevant to per-sonal advocacy as the Board considersappropriate.
(3) A person is a qualifying person for the pur-
poses of this Act if—
(a) he or she is not less than 18 years of age
and, in the opinion of the Director—
(i) is, by reason of a disability, unable
to obtain or has difficulty inobtaining a particular socialservice or services without theassistance or support of a personaladvocate, and
(ii) there are reasonable grounds for
believing that there is, in relationto the person, a risk of harm to hisor her health, welfare or safety ifhe or she is not provided with thesocial service or services that he orshe is seeking to obtain,
or
(b) he or she is under 18 years of age and—
(i) his or her sole parent or guardian is
a qualifying person, or
(ii) he or she has a disability or, in
relation to whom, in the opinionof the Director, there are reason-able grounds for believing that heor she has a disability, and ineither case the circumstances aresuch that it would be unreason-able to expect a parent or guard-ian of the person to act on his orher behalf in obtaining a part-icular social service or serviceswithout the assistance or supportof a personal advocate,
and, in the opinion of the Director,
there are reasonable grounds forbelieving that there is, in relation tothe person, a risk of harm to his or her[2007.] [ No. 2.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
health, welfare or safety if he or she is
not provided with the social service orservices that he or she is seeking toobtain.
(4) A person shall not cease to be a qualifying
person for the purposes of this Act by reason onlyof the fact that he or she is in receipt of a socialservice or services.
(5) The Board shall have regard to the follow-
ing to determine the order of priority to beaccorded to different qualifying persons in theassignment of personal advocates to such persons:
(a) the needs of qualifying persons to have
personal advocates assigned to them;
(b) the degrees of risk of harm to the
health, welfare or safety of qualifyingpersons if they are not provided withthe social service or services that theyare seeking to obtain;
(c) the benefits likely to accrue to qualify-
ing persons if personal advocates areassigned to them;
(d) the availability to qualifying persons of
advocacy services otherwise thanunder this Act; and
(e) such other matters as the Board con-
siders appropriate or as may be pre-scribed by regulations made by theMinister, which he or she is herebyauthorised to make for that purpose.
(6) The service provided to qualifying persons
under this section and sections 7B to 7F shall beknown, and is in this Act referred to, as the ‘Per-sonal Advocacy Service’.
(7) The Board may, with the approval of the
Minister and the consent of the Minister for Fin-ance, appoint a person who shall be known as theDirector of the Personal Advocacy Service, and isreferred to in this Act as ‘the Director’, to performthe functions conferred on the Director by thisAct.
(8) Subsections (2) and (4) of section 14 shall
apply to the Director in the same manner as theyapply to other members of the staff of the Board.
(9) The Director shall manage and control the
Personal Advocacy Service and shall be respon-sible to the Chief Executive for such managementand control.
(10) ( a) The Director shall, if the Director or a
member of the staff of the Board whois authorised to perform the functions
7S.5S.5
8[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
of the Director under section 7B is
informed by a person (in this subsec-tion referred to as a ‘specified person’)that he or she is of opinion in relationto another person that the second-mentioned person is a qualifying per-son, provide information to the personin relation to the Personal AdvocacyService and, in particular, the require-ments of section 7B in respect of anapplication for the assignment of a per-sonal advocate to a person.
(b) In this subsection ‘specified person’, in
relation to another person, means amember of that person’s family, a carerof that person or any other person,including a member of an organisationor group, who is actively involved inpromoting the health, welfare or well-being of that person.
(11) The functions of the Director under sub-
section (10) and section 7B may be performed bysuch members of the staff of the Board as theDirector may authorise in that behalf.
(12) Regulations under this section may con-
tain such incidental, supplementary and conse-quential provisions as appear to the Minister to benecessary or expedient for the purposes of theregulations.
(13) Every regulation under this section shall
be laid before each House of the Oireachtas assoon as may be after it is made and, if a resolutionannulling the regulation is passed by either suchHouse within the next 21 days on which thatHouse has sat after the regulation is laid before it,the regulation shall be annulled accordingly butwithout prejudice to the validity of anything pre-viously done thereunder.
Application
for assignmentof personaladvocate.7B.—(1) A person who is of opinion that he or
she is a qualifying person (in this section referredto as an ‘applicant’) may apply in writing, or insuch other form as may be specified by the Mini-ster, to the Director for the assignment of a per-sonal advocate to him or her and he or she shallspecify in the application the social service orservices that he or she is seeking to obtain.
(2) An application under subsection (1) may be
made by any person on behalf of an applicant.
(3) The Director shall determine whether or
not an applicant is a qualifying person and, if heor she is satisfied that the applicant is such a per-son, he or she shall assign a personal advocate tothe applicant in accordance with this Act.
(4) A decision to grant or to refuse to grant an
application under subsection (1) shall be made and[2007.] [ No. 2.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
the applicant concerned and, if appropriate, the
person who made the application on his or herbehalf shall be notified of it by the Director inwriting, or such other form as may be specified bythe Minister, as soon as practicable after thereceipt by the Director of the application.
(5) If the grant of an application under subsec-
tion (1) is refused, the notification under subsec-tion (4) shall specify the reasons for the refusaland state that the applicant concerned may appealagainst the decision of the Director under section7C.
(6) If the grant of an application under subsec-
tion (1) is refused, the Director may, at any time,reverse the decision where it appears to him or herthat the decision was erroneous in the light of newevidence or of new facts which have been broughtto his or her notice since the decision was made orby reason of some mistake having been made inrelation to the law or the facts, or where it appearsto him or her that there has been any relevantchange of circumstances of the applicant con-cerned since the decision was made, and the pro-visions of section 7C shall apply to the reviseddecision in the same manner as they apply to theoriginal decision relating to the application.
(7) Subsection (6) shall not apply to a decision
relating to an application which is on appeal orreference under section 7C unless the reviseddecision would be in favour of the applicantconcerned.
(8) A document purporting to be a certificate
of a decision made under this section by the Direc-tor or, as the case may be, a person authorisedunder section 7A(11) to perform the functions ofthe Director under this section and to be signedby the Director or that person, as the case may be,shall be prima facie evidence of the making of the
decision and of the terms of that decision, without
proof of the signature of the Director or that per-son, as may be appropriate, or of his or herofficial capacity.
Appeals. 7C.—(1) Chapters 2 (other than sections 309,
312, 315, 316(3) and 321) and 4 of Part 10 of theSocial Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 shall applyto an appeal against a decision of the Directorunder section 7B in the same manner as they applyto appeals against a decision of a deciding officerunder Chapter 1 of that Part, subject to the follow-ing and any other necessary modifications:
(a) in section 304, the insertion of ‘and
section 7C (inserted by section 5 of the
Citizens Information Act 2007 )o ft h e
Comhairle Act 2000’ after ‘for the pur-poses of this Act’;
9S.5S.5
10[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
(b) in section 307, the substitution of refer-
ences to the Director for references toa deciding officer;
(c) in section 311—
(i) the substitution of the following
subsection for subsection (1):
‘(1) Where any person is dissatis-
fied with the decision given by theDirector, the question shall, onnotice of appeal being given, by oron behalf of that person, to theChief Appeals Officer within theprescribed time, be referred to anappeals officer.’,
and
(ii) in subsection (3)—
(I) the deletion of ‘or section 312’,
(II) the substitution of a reference
to the Director for the refer-ence to the deciding officer,and
(III) the deletion of ‘, or the deter-
mination of the employee ofthe Executive, as the casemay require,’;
(d) the substitution of the following section
for section 319:
‘Effect of
reviseddecision byappeals officer.319.—A revised decision given
by an appeals officer shall takeeffect from the date consideredappropriate by the appeals officerhaving regard to the circum-stances of the case.’;
(e) the substitution of the following section
for section 320:
‘Decision of
appeals officerto be final andconclusive.320.—The decision of an
appeals officer on any questionarising under section 7C (insertedbysection 5 of the Citizens Infor-
mation Act 2007 ) of the Comhairle
Act 2000 shall, subject to sections317, 318 and 327, be final andconclusive.’;
(f) in section 328, the deletion of ‘a decid-
ing officer or’;[2007.] [ No. 2.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
(g) the substitution of the following section
for section 329:
‘Revision to
includerevisionconsisting ofreversal.329.—A reference in this Part
to a revised decision given by anappeals officer includes a refer-ence to a revised decision whichreverses the original decision.’;
and
(h) the substitution of the following section
for section 330:
‘Regulations. 330.—The Minister may make
regulations specifying the pro-cedures to be followed by anappeals officer when decidingquestions under section 311,including that section as appliedby subsection (1) of section 7C(inserted by section 5 of the Citi-
zens Information Act 2007 ) of the
Comhairle Act 2000.’.
(2) References in the provisions of Part 10 of
the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 appliedby subsection (1) to that Part shall be construedas including references to that Part as so applied.
Functions of
personaladvocate.7D.—(1) A personal advocate assigned to a
qualifying person under this Act shall—
(a) if appropriate, make or assist in making
an application for an assessment underPart 2 of the Disability Act 2005 inrespect of the person and assist, sup-port and represent the person inaccordance with the said Part 2 inrelation to the application, assessmentand service statement (if any) preparedin respect of the person,
(b) assist, support and represent the
person—
(i) to apply for and obtain a social
service or services specified in theapplication under section 7B(1)concerned or, if appropriate, in aservice statement prepared inrespect of the person, and
(ii) if the personal advocate considers
it appropriate to do so, to pursueany right of review, reference orappeal to a body other than acourt if the application for suchservice or services is refused,
and
11S.5S.5
12[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
(c) for the purpose of assisting the person
to promote the best interests of his orher health, welfare and well-being,provide support or training or bothto—
(i) the person, or
(ii) a member of the person’s family, a
carer of the person or any otherperson, including a member of anorganisation or group, who isactively involved in promoting thehealth, welfare or well-being ofthe person,
or both for so long as the personal
advocate is performing functions underparagraph ( a)o r( b) in respect of the
person.
(2) A personal advocate assigned to a qualify-
ing person under this Act may, for the purpose ofperforming his or her functions, at any reasonabletime enter any place where day care, residentialcare or training is provided for the person andmake such inquiries in such place in relation to theperson as he or she considers appropriate.
(3) Subject to the Data Protection Acts 1988
and 2003, a personal advocate assigned to a quali-fying person under this Act may, for the purposeof performing his or her functions, do all or any ofthe following:
(a) obtain from a statutory body or volun-
tary body any information relating tothe person that the personal advocateconsiders necessary;
(b) attend and represent the person at any
meeting, consultation or discussion atwhich the interests of the person arebeing considered and which the personwould have attended if he or she werenot a qualifying person; and
(c) identify any person referred to in sub-
section (1)( c)(ii) who may assist the
qualifying person.
(4) A statutory body or voluntary body that
provides social services shall co-operate with apersonal advocate in the performance of his orher functions.
(5) A person who by act or omission obstructs
or hinders a personal advocate in the performanceof his or her functions shall be guilty of an offenceand shall be liable on summary conviction to a finenot exceeding \2,000 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 3 months or both.[2007.] [ No. 2.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
(6) Proceedings for an offence under this
section may be brought and prosecuted by theMinister.
(7) Notwithstanding section 10(4) of the Petty
Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851, summary proceedingsfor an offence under this section may be institutedwithin 12 months from the date of the offence.
(8) In this section ‘application’, ‘assessment’
and ‘service statement’ have the meaningsassigned to them respectively by Part 2 of the Dis-ability Act 2005.
Liability for
offences bybodiescorporate.7E.—(1) Where an offence under section 7D(5)
is committed by a body corporate and is proved tohave been committed with the consent, conniv-ance or approval of, or to have been attributableto any wilful neglect on the part of, any person,being a director, manager, secretary or otherofficer of the body corporate or a person who waspurporting to act in any such capacity, that person,as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of anoffence and shall be liable to be proceeded againstand punished as if he or she were guilty of thefirst-mentioned offence.
(2) Where the affairs of a body corporate are
managed by its members, subsection (1) shallapply in relation to the acts and defaults of amember in connection with his or her functionsof management as if he or she were a director ormanager of the body corporate.
Arrangement
to provideservices ofpersonaladvocates.7F.—The Board, with the approval of the Mini-
ster and subject to such terms and conditions asare considered appropriate, may arrange for thefunctions of personal advocates under section 7Dto be performed by persons other than membersof the staff of the Board and sections 7A to 7Eshall, with any necessary modifications, apply tosuch persons.”.
6.—Section 9 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by the substitution of “15 members” for
“20 members”,
(b) in subsection (3), by the substitution of “5 years” for “3
years”,
(c) in subsection (4), by the substitution of the following para-
graph for paragraph ( b):
“(b) 3 members who represent persons with a dis-
ability, and”,
(d) in subsection (12), by the substitution of “6 members” for
“8 members” in both places where it occurs, and
(e) by the deletion of subsection (13).
13S.5
Amendment of
section 9 ofPrincipal Act.Amendment of
section 11 ofPrincipal Act.
Amendment of
section 23 ofPrincipal Act.
Directions to
Board.
Short title,
collective citationandcommencement.
14[No. 2.] [2007.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
7.—Section 11 of the Principal Act is amended by the substitution
of the following subsection for subsection (3):
“(3) The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be 8 or
such lesser number (being not less than 5) as the Board mayfrom time to time determine.”.
8.—Section 23 of the Principal Act is amended by the substitution
of the following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) The Chief Executive shall, whenever required to do so
by the Committee of Da ´il E´ireann established under the Stand-
ing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann to examine and report to Da ´il
E´ireann on the appropriation accounts and reports of the
Comptroller and Auditor General, give evidence to that Com-mittee on—
(a) the regularity and propriety of the transactions
recorded or required to be recorded in any book orother record of account subject to audit by theComptroller and Auditor General which the Boardor the Chief Executive is required by this Act toprepare,
(b) the economy and efficiency of the Board in the use of
its resources,
(c) the systems, procedures and practices employed by
the Board for the purpose of evaluating the effec-tiveness of its operations, and
(d) any matter affecting the Board referred to in a special
report of the Comptroller and Auditor Generalunder section 11(2) of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral (Amendment) Act 1993 or in any otherreport of the Comptroller and Auditor General (inso far as it relates to a matter specified in paragraph(a), (b)o r( c)) that is laid before Da ´il E´ireann.”.
9.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the following
section after section 24:
“Directions to
Board.24A.—The Minister may give to the Board such
general policy directions (including directions toundertake campaigns to disseminate informationrelating to a particular social service or services)with regard to the performance of its functions ashe or she considers appropriate, and the Boardshall comply with any such directions.”.
10.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Citizens Information Act
2007.
(2) The Principal Act and this Act may be cited together as the
Citizens Information Acts 2000 and 2007.
(3) This Act (other than section 3 ) shall come into operation on
such day or days as the Minister for Social and Family Affairs may[2007.] [ No. 2.] Citizens Information Act 2007 .
appoint by order or orders either generally or with reference to any
particular purpose or provision and different days may be soappointed for different purposes or different provisions.
15S.10