————————
Number 30of2009
————————
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CHARGES) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Interpretation.
2. Meaning of residential property.3. Charge on certain residential property.4. Exemptions from charge.5. Declaration of liability and payment of charge.6. Late payment fee.7. Unpaid amount to be a charge on property.8. Receipts and certificates.9. Collection, care and management of charge.
10. Delegation of functions of local authority relating to collec-
tion of charges, etc.
11. Data sharing and exchange.12. Offences and penalties.13. Expenses of Minister.14. Regulations, orders and directions.15. Payment to town councils.16. Short title and commencement.
————————
12[No. 30.] [2009.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
Acts Referred to
Capital Acquisitions Tax Consolidation Act 2003 2003, No. 1
Capital Gains Tax ActsElectricity (Supply) Act 1927 1927, No. 27Family Law (Divorce) Act 1996 1996, No. 33Finance Act 2001 2001, No. 7Health Act 2004 2004, No. 42Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992 1992, No. 18Housing Act 1966 1966, No. 21Judicial Separation and Family Law Reform Act 1989 1989, No. 6Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 14 & 15 Vict. c. 93Residential Tenancies Act 2004 2004, No. 27Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 2005, No. 26Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999 1999, No. 31Tax ActsTaxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Valuation Act 2001 2001, No. 13Value-Added Tax Act 1972 1972, No. 22————————
Number 30of2009
————————
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CHARGES) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO IMPOSE ON THE OWNERS OF CERTAIN RESI-
DENTIAL PROPERTIES LIABILITY FOR THE PAY-MENT OF AN ANNUAL CHARGE IN RESPECT OFEACH SUCH PROPERTY CONCERNED TO THE LOCALAUTHORITY IN WHOSE AREA THE RESIDENTIALPROPERTY IS SITUATED, AND TO PROVIDE FORRELATED MATTERS.
[21st July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Act of 1992” means the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
1992;
“Act of 1997” means the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997;“Act of 2001” means the Local Government Act 2001;“building” includes—
(a) part of a building, and
(b) a structure or erection of any kind and of any materials,
or any part of that structure or erection,
but does not include a vehicle or a mobile home;“charge” has the meaning assigned to it by section 3(1) and (2);
“city council” has the meaning assigned to it by the Act of 2001;“county council” has the meaning assigned to it by the Act of 2001;“dwelling” includes a building used, or suitable for use, by an individ-
ual as a separate dwelling, whether or not he or she shares or wouldbe entitled to share with any other individual any accommodation,amenity or facility in the building or, as the case may be, the premisesof which the building forms part;
“housing authority” has the same meaning as it has in the Act of
1992;
3Interpretation.S.1
Meaning of
residential property.
4[No. 30.] [2009.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
“liability date” has the meaning assigned to it by section 3(1) and(2);
“local authority” means a county council or a city council;
“Minister” means the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and
Local Government;
“owner” means, in relation to a residential property, a person (other
than a mortgagee not in possession) who, whether in that person’sown right or as trustee or agent for any other person, is entitled toreceive the rent of the property or, where the property is not let,would be so entitled if it were so let;
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Minister;“relevant local authority” means—
(a) in relation to a residential property situated in a city, that
city council, or
(b) in all other cases, the county council for the county in
which a residential property is situated.
2.—(1) In this Act, “residential property” means a building situ-
ated in the State used, or suitable for use, as a dwelling, including anyhouse, maisonette, flat or apartment (including a bedsit) but does notinclude—
(a) an approved building within the meaning of section 482 of
the Act of 1997,
(b) a building that forms part of the trading stock of a
business—
(i) from which, since its construction, no income has been
derived, and
(ii) which has not, at any time since its construction, been
used as a dwelling,
(c) a building let by a Minister of the Government, a housing
authority or the Health Service Executive established bythe Health Act 2004,
(d) a building occupied under a shared ownership lease within
the meaning of section 2 of the Act of 1992,
(e) a building let by a body standing approved for the pur-
poses of section 6 of the Act of 1992,
(f) a building that is leased to, or that is the subject of an
agreement with, a housing authority, in connection withthe performance by the authority of its functions undersection 56 of the Housing Act 1966,
(g) a building that is leased to, or is the subject of an agree-
ment with, the Health Service Executive, to be used bythe Health Service Executive in the performance of itsfunctions under the Health Act 2004, or
(h) a building to which Schedule 3 of the Valuation Act 2001
applies.[2009.] [ No. 30.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a bedroom, forming part of a
residential property, that is let under a letting arrangement wherebythe individual occupying that bedroom is entitled to share with anyother individual any other accommodation, amenity or facility in theproperty is not a residential property, but the building of which it isa part is.
3.—(1) A person who, on such date (in this Act referred to as the
“liability date”) falling in the year 2009 as is prescribed, is the ownerof a residential property shall be liable to pay the sum of \200 (in
this Act referred to as a “charge”) to the relevant local authority.
(2) A person who, on 31 March (in this Act also referred to as
the “liability date”) of each year subsequent to the year 2009, is theowner of a residential property shall be liable to pay the sum (in thisAct also referred to as a “charge”) specified in subsection (3) to the
relevant local authority.
(3) The sum referred to in subsection (2) shall be—
(a)\200, or
(b) where a sum stands prescribed under subsection (5) for the
purposes of subsection (2) , that sum.
(4) The owner of a residential property on a liability date shall
pay the charge for which that person is liable under this section tothe relevant local authority before the expiration of such period asis prescribed.
(5) The Minister may from time to time review the amount of the
charge in subsection (2) and, having regard to any change in the
consumer price index since the amount of the charge was last speci-fied or prescribed under this section, prescribe a revised amount asthe Minister considers appropriate, and that amount shall have effectfor and from the next liability date until further varied.
(6) For the purposes of subsection (5) , “change in the consumer
price index” means the difference between—
(a) the All Items Consumer Price Index number last published
by the Central Statistics Office before the date when theamount of the charge in subsection (2) was last specified
or prescribed under this section, and
(b) the said number last published before the date of the
review under subsection (5) ,
expressed as a percentage of the first mentioned number.
(7) In the case of a charge relating to a liability date due in respect
of a residential property that is co-owned by 2 or more persons—
(a) each person who is a co-owner shall be jointly and sever-
ally liable to pay the said charge, and
(b) payment of the charge by any one or more of the
co-owners shall discharge the liability of each co-ownerto pay that charge to the local authority concerned.
5S.2
Charge on certain
residential property.Exemptions from
charge.
6[No. 30.] [2009.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
4.—(1) A person who, on a liability date, is the owner of a resi-
dential property shall not, in respect of that residential property, beliable to pay the charge relating to that liability date if the residentialproperty is, on that date—
(a) in the case of an owner who is an individual—
(i) occupied by that individual as his or her sole or main
residence, or
(ii) partly occupied by that individual as his or her sole
or main residence, and as regards the portion of theproperty not so occupied he or she is entitled to andclaims relief under section 216A (inserted by section32 of the Finance Act 2001) of the Act of 1997 inrespect of relevant sums not exceeding his or herlimit for the year of assessment concerned,
or
(b) comprised in a discretionary trust (within the meaning of
section 2 of the Capital Acquisitions Tax ConsolidationAct 2003) or the owner of which is a body corporate ben-eficially entitled in possession, being a trust or body cor-porate which is approved as an eligible charity in accord-ance with Part 3 of Schedule 26A of the Act of 1997.
(2) If, on a liability date—
(a) an individual is the owner of a residential property (in this
subsection referred to as the “first property”) and occu-pies it as his or her sole or main residence,
(b) that individual is also the owner of another residential
property (in this subsection referred to as the “secondproperty”),
(c) that individual became the owner of the second property
within the period of 1 year immediately before the liab-ility date, and
(d) not later than 6 months after the liability date, the second
property becomes his or her sole or main residence andthe individual ceases to be the owner of the first property,
then he or she shall not, in respect of either the first property or the
second property, be liable to pay the charge relating to the liabilitydate and the relevant local authority shall refund any charge and anyassociated late payment fee paid by that individual for either the firstor the second property in relation to that liability date.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) , an individual becomes the
owner of residential property when he or she becomes entitled topossession of it.
(4) ( a) An individual who, on a liability date, is the owner of a
residential property shall not, in respect of that residen-tial property, be liable to pay the charge relating to it forthat liability date if—
(i) he or she is or was, as the case may be, a party to
a marriage,[2009.] [ No. 30.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
(ii) the residential property concerned is, on that date, the
sole or main residence of the other party to that mar-riage, and
(iii) a decree of divorce or a decree of judicial separation
was granted in respect of that marriage on or beforethat date.
(b) In this subsection—
“decree of divorce” means—
(i) a decree under section 5 of the Family Law (Divorce)
Act 1996, or
(ii) a decree or order (howsoever described) of like effect
to the decree referred to in subparagraph (i) granted
under the law of a place other than the State andrecognised under the law of the State;
“decree of judicial separation” means—
(i) a decree under section 3 of the Judicial Separation
and Family Law Reform Act 1989, or
(ii) a decree or order (howsoever described) of like effect
to the decree referred to in subparagraph (i) granted
under the law of a place other than the State andrecognised under the law of the State.
(5) If, on a liability date, an individual who is the owner of a
residential property—
(a) is incapacitated by reason of long term mental or physical
infirmity, and
(b) had been obliged, at a time prior to that date, due to the
said mental or physical infirmity, to vacate the said prop-erty, which had been, immediately preceding that time,his or her sole or main residence, and
(c) is normally resident in a place of which he or she is not
the owner,
then he or she shall not be liable to pay a charge in respect of that
property in relation to that liability date.
(6) ( a) If, on a liability date, a residential property is occupied,
free of rent, as his or her sole or main residence by anindividual who is a relative of the owner of the property,and the owner resides in another property as his or hersole or main residence, then the owner shall not be liableto pay a charge in respect of the first-mentioned propertyin relation to that liability date, provided that the first-mentioned property and the sole or main residence of theowner are located—
(i) on the same property, or
(ii) within 2 kilometres of each other.
7S.4S.4
Declaration of
liability andpayment of charge.
Late payment fee.
Unpaid amount to
be a charge onproperty.
Receipts and
certificates.
8[No. 30.] [2009.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
(b) For the purposes of paragraph (a) , “relative” includes—
(i) a relation of the spouse or partner of the owner,
(ii) a person in respect of whom the owner is the legal
guardian, and
(iii) a person who is a ward of court in respect of whom
the owner is the committee.
5.—(1) A person who, on a liability date, is liable to pay a charge
to a relevant local authority shall make and provide to the relevantlocal authority concerned a declaration to that effect in such form asmay be prescribed by the Minister.
(2) A declaration referred to in subsection (1) shall—
(a) contain such information as the Minister may prescribe,
(b) be provided to the local authority before the expiration of
the period referred to in section 3(4) , and
(c) be accompanied by payment of the charge payable in
respect of the residential property concerned effected inaccordance with subsection (3) .
(3) Payment of the charge in respect of a residential property shall
be effected by such means as may be prescribed.
(4) A person who contravenes this section shall be guilty of an
offence.
6.—(1) A person liable to pay a charge in respect of a residential
property who, after one month immediately following the expirationof the period prescribed for the purpose of section 3(4) , has not com-
plied with that subsection shall, in addition to his or her liability topay the charge, be liable for and pay to the local authority concerneda further sum of \20 (in this Act referred to as a “late payment fee”)
in respect of each month or part of a month falling after the expir-ation of the said one month.
(2) Payment of a late payment fee shall be effected by the same
means as are prescribed in relation to the payment of a charge.
7.—(1) Any charge or late payment fee due and unpaid by an
owner of residential property shall, subject to subsection (2) ,b ea n d
remain a charge on the property to which it relates.
(2) The said property shall not, as against a bona fide purchaser
for full consideration in money or money’s worth or a mortgagee,remain charged with or liable to the payment of such unpaid chargeor late payment fee after the expiration of 12 years from the dateupon which the amount concerned fell due.
8.—(1) When a charge, and any associated late payment fee, in
respect of a residential property for a specified liability date has beenpaid, the relevant local authority shall give a receipt for the payment,and on application to it in writing by or on behalf of an owner of the[2009.] [ No. 30.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
property, the relevant local authority shall give a certificate to the
owner, in such form as it thinks fit, of the amount of the chargepaid by such owner in respect of the property concerned for thatliability date.
(2) As against a bona fide purchaser or mortgagee of such prop-
erty for full consideration in money or money’s worth without notice,or a person deriving title from or under such a purchaser or mort-gagee, such a certificate shall discharge the property concerned fromliability for any charge or late payment fee due by the owner of thatproperty for that liability date.
9.—(1) All charges and late payment fees imposed and payable
to a local authority pursuant to this Act are placed under the careand management of the local authority concerned.
(2) It is a function of each local authority to collect charges and
late payment fees due to it under this Act and to deal with mattersassociated with such collection.
(3) A local authority may recover from an owner of a residential
property, as a simple contract debt in any court of competent juris-diction, any amount due and owing to the authority which is eithera charge in respect of that property for a liability date or an associ-ated late payment fee, or both.
10.—(1) A local authority may delegate such one or more of its
functions, other than the power to prosecute, relating to the collec-tion of charges or late payment fees as it considers appropriate to arelevant board.
(2) A local authority shall, where the Minister so directs in writ-
ing, delegate to a relevant board such one or more of its functions,other than the power to prosecute, relating to the collection ofcharges or late payment fees as is specified in the direction.
(3) Where a delegation is made under this section—
(a) the relevant board shall perform the function concerned
in accordance with any limitations specified in the del-egation as to the area, period in which, or extent to whichit is to perform that function, and
(b) a provision of or under this Act or any other enactment
(whether passed before or after the passing of this Act)that vests functions in the local authority or regulates themanner in which any function is to be performed shall, ifand in so far as it is applicable to the delegated function,have effect, for the purposes of the performance of thatfunction by the relevant board, with the substitution ofthe relevant board for the local authority.
(4) A local authority may revoke a delegation under this section
only if it has first obtained the consent of the Minister.
(5) A local authority shall, where the Minister so directs in writ-
ing, revoke a delegation under this section.
(6) The powers conferred on a local authority by this section shall
be executive functions for the purposes of the Act of 2001.
9S.8
Collection, care and
management ofcharge.
Delegation of
functions of localauthority relating tocollection ofcharges, etc.S.10
Data sharing and
exchange.
10[No. 30.] [2009.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
(7) In this section “relevant board” means, as the context may
require—
(a) the Local Government Computer Services Board estab-
lished by the Local Government Computer ServicesBoard (Establishment) Order 1975 (S.I. No. 212 of1975), and
(b) the Local Government Management Services Board estab-
lished by the Local Government Management ServicesBoard (Establishment) Order 1996 (S.I. No. 410 of 1996),
or either of them.
11.—(1) Notwithstanding any enactment or rule of law—
(a) a relevant person shall, upon a request from a local auth-
ority, provide the local authority with such informationin the possession or control of the relevant person or itssubsidiary as the local authority may reasonably requirefor the purpose of enabling the local authority to performits functions under this Act, and
(b) a local authority shall, at such intervals as the Revenue
Commissioners may specify, provide the Revenue Com-missioners with such information obtained by the localauthority pursuant to this Act, including tax referencenumbers, as the Revenue Commissioners may reasonablyrequire for the purpose of enabling them to perform theirfunctions under a specified enactment.
(2) In this section—
“Act of 1972” means the Value-Added Tax Act 1972;“relevant person” means, as the context may require—
(a) the Private Residential Tenancies Board established under
section 150 of the Residential Tenancies Act 2004,
(b) the Electricity Supply Board established in accordance
with the Electricity (Supply) Act 1927, and
(c) the Revenue Commissioners,
or any of them;“specified enactment” means—
(a) the Tax Acts,
(b) the Capital Gains Tax Acts,
(c) the Act of 1972,
(d) the Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999, and
(e) the Capital Acquisitions Tax Consolidation Act 2003,
or any of them;[2009.] [ No. 30.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
“tax reference number” means—
(a) in relation to an individual, that individual’s personal
public service number (within the meaning of section 262of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005), or
(b) in relation to a body corporate—
(i) the reference number stated on any return of income
form or notice of assessment issued to that personby an officer of the Revenue Commissioners, or
(ii) the registration number of the body corporate for the
purposes of the Act of 1972.
12.—(1) A person guilty of an offence under section 5 shall be
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \2,000.
(2) A person who is convicted of an offence under section 5 shall,
on each day on which the contravention of which that offence con-sists is continued by the person after having been so convicted, beguilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction to afine not exceeding \100.
(3) Notwithstanding section 10(4) of the Petty Sessions (Ireland)
Act 1851, summary proceedings for an offence under this Act maybe instituted not later than 2 years from the date on which evidencesufficient to justify the institution of proceedings for the offence con-cerned comes to the knowledge of the relevant local authority forthe residential property to which the offence relates, but in no caseshall such proceedings be commenced later than 6 years from thedate on which the offence concerned was committed.
(4) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body cor-
porate and is proved to have been so committed with the consent orconnivance of or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of anyperson, being a director, manager, secretary or other officer of thebody corporate, or a person who was purporting to act in such capa-city, that person shall, as well as the body corporate, be guilty of anoffence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished asif he or she were guilty of the first-mentioned offence.
(5) Summary proceedings for an offence under this Act may be
brought and prosecuted by the relevant local authority for the resi-dential property to which the offence relates.
(6) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act, the
court shall order the person to pay to the local authority concernedthe costs and expenses, measured by the court, incurred by the localauthority in relation to the investigation, detection and prosecutionof the offence, unless the court is satisfied that there are special andsubstantial reasons for not so doing.
13.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.
11S.11
Offences and
penalties.
Expenses of
Minister.Regulations, orders
and directions.
Payment to town
councils.
Short title and
commencement.
12[No. 30.] [2009.] Local Government (Charges) Act
2009 .
14.—(1) The Minister may by regulations provide for any matter
referred to in this Act as prescribed or to be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, regu-
lations or an order under this Act may contain such incidental, conse-quential and supplementary provisions as appear to the Minister tobe necessary or expedient for the purposes of the regulations ororder.
(3) A regulation, order or direction under this Act may—
(a) apply in respect of all local authorities or such local auth-
orities or classes of local authority as are specified in theregulations, order or direction, and
(b) contain different provisions in relation to different local
authorities or classes of local authority.
(4) Every order (other than an order under section 16(2) ) and
regulation made by the Minister under this Act shall be laid beforeeach House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and,if a resolution annulling the order or regulation is passed by eithersuch House within the next 21 days on which that House sits afterthe order or regulation is laid before it, the order or regulation shallbe annulled accordingly, but without prejudice to the validity of any-thing previously done thereunder.
15.—(1) A county council shall, each year, make a payment to
each town council within the county, and such payment shall be cal-culated having regard to—
(a) the income from the charge and any associated late pay-
ment fees collected in respect of residential properties inthe administrative area of the town council concerned,and
(b) the costs incurred by the said county council in connection
with the collecting of the said income.
(2) In this section—
“administrative area”, in relation to a town council, means the area
which continues to stand established under section 10 of the Act of2001 for the purposes of local government in respect of that towncouncil;
“town council” means a body having charge of a local government
area referred to in section 10(3) of, and set out in Part 1 of Schedule6 to, the Act of 2001.
16.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Local Government
(Charges) Act 2009.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision, and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes and different provisions.