————————
Number 7of2007
————————
NATIONAL OIL RESERVES AGENCY ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short Title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.3. Expenses.
PART 2
Share Transfer
4. Transfer to Minister of share owned by Irish National Pet-
roleum Corporation Limited in National Oil ReservesAgency Limited.
5. Share transfer day.6. Transfer costs and stamp duty.
PART 3
The National Oil Reserves Agency
7. Continuation of Agency.
8. Object and functions of Agency.9. Additional functions.
10. Share capital of Agency.11. Issue of shares.12. Exercise by Minister of functions exercisable by
shareholders.
13. Memorandum and articles of association.2[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
14. Board of directors.
15. Strategy statement.16. Power to establish subsidiaries.17. Power to charge and recover fees.18. Power to engage consultants and advisers.19. Chief executive (appointment and term of office).20. Functions of chief executive.21. Staff of Agency.22. Superannuation.23. Membership of either House of Oireachtas, European Parlia-
ment or local authority.
24. Unauthorised disclosure of confidential information.25. Code of conduct.
26. Power to borrow.27. Temporary borrowing.28. Annual report.29. Accounts and audit.30. Information to Minister on performance of functions.31. Information to Oireachtas on performance of functions.
PART 4
Maintenance of Oil Stocks
32. Duty of Agency.33. Holding contracts.34. Duties of Minister.35. Release of oil stocks in cases of particular urgency.
PART 5
Levy on Relevant Disposals of Petroleum Products
36. Definitions for Part 5 .
37. Liability of oil companies and oil consumers to pay levy.38. Exemptions from levy.
39. Volume assessment.40. Calculation of levy.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
41. Levy assessment notice.
42. Interest on unpaid amount of assessment.43. Recovery of unpaid levy and interest.44. Regulations relating to levy.
PART 6
Enforcement Provisions
45. Definitions for Part 6 .
46. Authorised officers.47. Powers of authorised officers.48. Search warrants.
49. Duty of authorised officers to report certain matters.50. Offences.51. Indemnification.
PART 7
Amendments and Revocation
52. Amendment of section 7 of Act of 2001.
53. Amendment of section 8 of Act of 2001.
54. Amendment of section 9 of Act of 2001.55. Amendment of Third Schedule to Freedom of Information
Act 1997.
56. Revocation.
PART 8
Miscellaneous Provisions
57. Regulations to give effect to acts of European Communities.
58. Regulations and orders.59. Minister’s power to make regulations relating to returns.60. Laying of regulations and orders before Houses of
Oireachtas.
61. Power of Minister to apply for compliance order and issue
directions.
62. Minister’s prior approval required for certain contracts, hold-
ing contract obligations, etc.
63. Burden of proof in certain proceedings.
34[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
64. Prosecution of offences.
65. Offences by bodies corporate.66. Penalties.67. Giving of notices.
————————
Acts Referred to
Companies Act 1963 1963, No. 33
Companies ActsEthics in Public Office Act 1995 1995, No. 22European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2Finance Act 1999 1999, No. 2Freedom of Information Act 1997 1997, No. 13Irish National Petroleum Corporation Limited Act 2001 2001, No. 26Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 14 & 15 Vic., c. 50————————
Number 7of2007
————————
NATIONAL OIL RESERVES AGENCY ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER OF THE
SHARE HELD BY THE IRISH NATIONAL PETROLEUMCORPORATION LIMITED IN THE NATIONAL OILRESERVES AGENCY LIMITED TO THE MINISTER FORCOMMUNICATIONS, MARINE AND NATURALRESOURCES; TO CONTINUE IN EXISTENCE THENATIONAL OIL RESERVES AGENCY LIMITED AS ANGHNI ´OMHAIREACHT CHU ´LTACA OLA NA ´ISIU´NTA
OR THE NATIONAL OIL RESERVES AGENCY; TODEFINE ITS FUNCTIONS, INCLUDING THOSE RELAT-ING TO OIL STOCKHOLDING OBLIGATIONS; TOIMPOSE A LEVY ON RELEVANT DISPOSALS OF PET-ROLEUM PRODUCTS; TO AMEND THE IRISHNATIONAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITEDACT 2001; AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[13th March , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the National Oil Reserves
Agency Act 2007.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or different provisions.
2.—In this Act—
“Act of 1963” means the Companies Act 1963;“Act of 2001” means the Irish National Petroleum Corporation Lim-
ited Act 2001;
“Agency” means the body corporate formed and registered under
the Companies Acts and continued in existence under section 7 as
An Ghnı ´omhaireacht Chu ´ltaca Ola Na ´isiu´nta or, in the English lang-
uage, as the National Oil Reserves Agency;
5Short Title and
commencement.
Interpretation.Pt.1S . 2
6[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
“authorised officer” has the meaning assigned by section 46 ;
“bilateral agreement” means any agreement between the Govern-
ment and the government of another state relating to the holding ofoil stocks;
“chief executive” means the chief executive of the Agency;“Council Directive” means Council Directive 2006/67/EC of 24 July
2006
1imposing an obligation on Member States to maintain mini-
mum stocks of crude oil and/or petroleum products;
“designated subsidiary” means a subsidiary in respect of which an
order is in operation under section 16(12) ;
“holding contract” has the meaning assigned by section 33 ;
“IEP Agreement” means the Agreement on an International Energy
Program signed at Paris on 18 November 1974;
“intermediate product” means any substance other than crude oil
that is capable of being processed into petroleum products of anydescription;
“levy” means the levy imposed under Part 5 ;
“local authority” has the same meaning as in the Local Government
Act 2001;
“Minister” means the Minister for Communications, Marine and
Natural Resources;
“national oil reserves” means at any time the total volume of oil
stocks (excluding stocks held in the State under a bilateralagreement) held at that time by—
(a) the Agency or another person on its behalf under a hold-
ing contract,
(b) oil companies, and
(c) oil consumers;
“oil” means crude oil, intermediate products and petroleum
products;
“oil company”, with respect to any month, means any person (other
than the Agency) that, in the preceding calendar year—
(a) imported into the State or acquired, by purchase or other-
wise, from another oil company or from an oil refiningor oil storage facility in the State, oil for that person’sown consumption, for resale or for disposal to a thirdparty, or
(b) operated an oil refining or oil storage facility in the State
that held in storage, consumed or sold oil;
“oil consumer”, with respect to any month, means any person that,
in the preceding calendar year—
(a) imported into the State,
1OJ No. L217, 8.8.2006, p.8[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(b) acquired, by purchase or otherwise, from an oil company
in the State, or
(c) held in storage in the State,
1,000 or more tonnes of petroleum products exclusively for that per-
son’s own consumption in the State and not for resale or for disposalto a third party;
“petroleum products” includes the following categories of products:
(a) motor spirit and aviation fuel (that is to say, jet fuel of the
gasoline type and aviation spirit);
(b) gas oil, diesel oil and kerosene (including jet fuel of the
kerosene type);
(c) fuel oils;
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulation;“regulations relating to returns” means regulations under section 59 ;
“share transfer day” means the day appointed under section 5 ;
“stockholding obligations”, in relation to the State, means its obli-
gations relating to the maintenance of oil stocks under—
(a) the Council Directive,
(b) any provision of the treaties governing the European
Communities,
(c) any act adopted by the institutions of those Communities,
(d) the IEP Agreement, and
(e) any international convention or agreement to which the
State is or becomes a party;
“subsidiary” means a subsidiary (within the meaning of section 155
of the Act of 1963) of the Agency;
“superannuation benefit” means a pension, gratuity or other allow-
ance payable on resignation, retirement or death.
3.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of monies provided by the Oireachtas.
7Pt.1S . 2
Expenses.Transfer to Minister
of share owned byIrish NationalPetroleumCorporationLimited in NationalOil ReservesAgency Limited.
Share transfer day.
Transfer costs and
stamp duty.
Continuation of
Agency.
Object and
functions ofAgency.
8[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
PART 2
Share Transfer
4.—Notwithstanding any enactment or rule of law or any provision
contained in the memorandum or articles of association of the IrishNational Petroleum Corporation Limited, the Minister shall by orderdirect the Irish National Petroleum Corporation Limited to transfer,on the share transfer day, the share owned by it in the National OilReserves Agency Limited to the Minister on such terms and con-ditions as the Minister, after consulting with the Minister for Finance,thinks fit.
5.—The Minister shall by order appoint a day to be the day on
which the Irish National Petroleum Corporation Limited transfersthe share owned by it in the National Oil Reserves Agency Limitedto the Minister.
6.—(1) Amounts (if any) paid by the Minister in respect of a
transfer directed under section 4 shall be repaid to the Central Fund
out of monies provided by the Oireachtas.
(2) Stamp duty is not chargeable on an instrument under which
the share owned by the Irish National Petroleum Corporation Lim-ited in the National Oil Reserves Agency Limited is transferred tothe Minister.
PART 3
The National Oil Reserves Agency
7.—(1) The National Oil Reserves Agency Limited continues in
existence under this Act, but is to be known as An Ghnı ´omhaireacht
Chu´ltaca Ola Na ´isiu´nta or, in the English language, as the National
Oil Reserves Agency.
(2) Subject to this Act, the Companies Acts continue to apply to
the Agency.
(3) Section 6(1)( a) of the Act of 1963 does not apply to the
Agency.
8.—(1) The principal object of the Agency is to perform the func-
tions assigned to it by or under this Act, including the functions of—
(a) maintaining, in accordance with Part 4, oil stocks,
(b) providing, on its own initiative or at the request of the
Minister, advice, information or guidance to the Ministeron any matter relating to the holding of oil stocks,
(c) collecting and recovering the levy,
(d) providing, as the Agency considers appropriate, such con-
sultancy, advisory, technical assistance and contractservices (including research and training services) in the[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
State or elsewhere, on any matter relating to the
Agency’s functions under subsection (1)(a) , and
(e) representing, at the request of the Minister, a Minister of
the Government at meetings of international bodies in sofar as the meetings relate to the holding of oil stocks.
(2) The object specified in subsection (1) is to be included in the
Agency’s memorandum of association.
(3) The Agency has power to do anything that appears to it to be
requisite, advantageous or incidental to, or appears to it to facilitate(either directly or indirectly), the performance by it of its functionsas specified in or under this Act or in its memorandum of associationand that is not inconsistent with any enactment for the time being inforce, including power—
(a) to acquire, by purchase or otherwise, hold, store, import,
export, transport and exchange oil,
(b) subject to the prior approval of the Minister given with the
consent of the Minister for Finance, to acquire land or aninterest in land,
(c) to construct, acquire, maintain, operate and develop, in
the State or elsewhere, works, plant, equipment, storagetanks and pipelines for holding and transporting oilstocks,
(d) to acquire, charter, hire or otherwise engage ships, vehicles
and other means of transportation,
(e) to undertake in the State or elsewhere any other commer-
cial business or operations in connection with the func-tions of the Agency,
(f) to invest and deal with the Agency’s money,
(g) subject to the prior approval of the Minister given with the
consent of the Minister for Finance, to enter into jointventures, partnerships or other commercial arrangementswith other persons to construct, acquire, maintain anddevelop in the State or elsewhere works, plant, equip-ment, storage tanks and pipelines for holding and trans-porting oil stocks,
(h) to sell, as the Agency thinks fit, oil held by or on behalf
of the Agency,
(i) subject to the prior approval of the Minister given with the
consent of the Minister for Finance, to sell all or part ofany other property of the Agency for such considerationas the Agency thinks fit and in particular for shares,stock, debentures or other securities of any body corpor-ate, and
(j) subject to the prior approval of the Minister given with the
consent of the Minister for Finance, to enter into anycommercial agreement with a third party in the State orelsewhere for the purpose of enabling the Agency to per-form its functions under subsection (1)(a) .
9Pt.3S . 8Pt.3S . 8
Additional
functions.
Share capital of
Agency.
Issue of shares.
Exercise by
Minister offunctionsexercisable byshareholders.
Memorandum and
articles ofassociation.
Board of directors.
10[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(4) This section does not prevent the inclusion in the memor-
andum of association of all objects and powers, consistent with thisAct, that are reasonable, necessary or proper for, or incidental orancillary to, the due attainment of the principal object of the Agency.
(5) The Agency may perform any of its functions through or by
the chief executive or any member of its staff duly authorised in thatbehalf by the Agency.
9.—The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for Finance
and after consulting with the Agency and any other Minister of theGovernment who, in the Minister’s opinion, is concerned, by orderassign to the Agency such additional functions connected with thefunctions assigned to it by or under this Act as the Minister con-siders appropriate.
10.—The authorised share capital of the Agency, as stated in its
memorandum of association, shall be such amount, divided intoshares of such value, as may be determined from time to time by theMinister for Finance after consulting with the Minister.
11.—(1) Shares in the share capital of the Agency may be issued
only with the consent of the Minister for Finance given after con-sulting with the Minister.
(2) The cost of any shares issued to the Minister by the Agency
shall be advanced to the Minister by the Minister for Finance out ofthe Central Fund or the growing produce of the Fund.
12.—The Minister may exercise, in respect of the shares held by
him or her in the Agency, all the rights and powers of a holder ofsuch shares and, where a right or power is exercisable by attorney,exercise it by his or her attorney.
13.—(1) The Agency shall take such steps as may be necessary
under the Companies Acts to alter its memorandum and articles ofassociation for the purpose of making them consistent with this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Acts,
any alteration that is made in the memorandum or articles of associ-ation of the Agency takes effect only if the alteration is made withthe prior approval of the Minister given with the consent of the Mini-ster for Finance.
14.—(1) The board of directors of the Agency is to consist of—
(a) not more than 5 directors (including the chairperson), and
(b) the person holding the office of chief executive who, by
virtue of that office, is a director.
(2) The directors (other than the chief executive) shall be
appointed by the Minister with the consent of the Minister forFinance.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(3) A person appointed as a director under subsection (2) shall be
a person who, in the Minister’s opinion, has experience and com-petence in one or more of the following areas:
(a) oil or oil related industries;
(b) chemical or chemical related industries;
(c) finance;
(d) economics;
(e) legal matters;
(f) energy production and supply industries.
(4) Each director appointed under subsection (2) shall be
appointed for a period not exceeding 5 years and is eligible forreappointment.
(5) The Minister shall designate one of the directors (other than
the chief executive) as chairperson.
(6) The Minister with the consent of the Minister for Finance
may, at any time, remove from office a director appointed undersubsection (2) if—
(a) in the Minister’s opinion, the director has become
incapable through ill-health of performing his or herfunctions,
(b) in the Minister’s opinion, the director has committed
stated misbehaviour,
(c) the director’s removal from office appears to the Minister
to be necessary for the Agency to perform its functionseffectively, or
(d) the director has contravened section 24 of this Act or an
applicable provision of the Ethics in Public Office Act1995.
(7) Section 182 of the Act of 1963 does not apply to the Agency.(8) The chairperson and other directors appointed under subsec-
tion (2) shall be paid by the Agency out of the levy such remuner-
ation (if any) and allowances for expenses as the Minister, with theconsent of the Minister for Finance, may determine.
(9) A person who, immediately before the commencement of this
section, held office as a director of the Agency shall, subject to sub-
section (6) and section 23 and the terms and conditions upon which
he or she was appointed, continue in office as such director until theend of the period for which he or she was appointed, as if appointedunder subsection (2) .
(10) In this section “applicable provision of the Ethics in Public
Office Act 1995”, in relation to a director appointed under subsection
(2), means a provision of that Act that, by virtue of a regulation
under section 3 of that Act, applies to that director.
11Pt.3 S.14Pt.3
Strategy statement.
Power to establish
subsidiaries.
12[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
15.—(1) As soon as practicable after the share transfer day, the
Agency shall prepare and submit to the Minister for approval astrategy statement for—
(a) in the case of the initial strategy statement, the ensuing
five year period, and
(b) in the case of each subsequent strategy statement, the
period specified by the Minister.
(2) Each strategy statement shall be prepared in such form and
manner as the Minister may direct.
(3) In preparing a strategy statement, the Agency shall have
regard to the need to ensure the most beneficial, effective andefficient use of its resources and shall include the followinginformation:
(a) the key strategies and activities the Agency will pursue to
further its objects and perform its functions;
(b) the outputs the Agency aims to achieve and against which
its performance will be assessed;
(c) the staff, resources and expenditure proposals necessary to
pursue the strategies and activities referred to in para-
graph (a) .
(4) As soon as practicable after approving a strategy statement,
the Minister shall cause a copy of the statement to be laid beforeeach House of the Oireachtas.
16.—(1) The Agency may, with the consent of the Minister and
the Minister for Finance, perform any of its functions through asubsidiary.
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1) , the Agency may do one or
more of the following:
(a) acquire, form or establish one or more than one subsidiary;
(b) acquire or hold shares, or any other interest, in a company
or become a member of a company.
(3) A subsidiary that is acquired, formed or established under
subsection (2) may be formed and registered under—
(a) the Companies Acts, or
(b) the laws of a place other than the State.
(4) The Agency shall ensure that the memorandum and articles
of association of each subsidiary are in a form consistent with thisAct and that the prior approval of the Minister and the Minister forFinance is obtained in relation to the memorandum and articles ofassociation of each subsidiary and any alterations to them.
(5) Each subsidiary formed or established under the Companies
Acts shall be limited by shares and comply with those Acts.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(6) The Minister may, subject to subsection (7) , give a direction
in writing to the Agency on any matter relating to a subsidiary, andthe Agency shall ensure compliance with the direction.
(7) A direction that relates to the disposal of any assets or sur-
pluses of a subsidiary may only be given with the consent of theMinister for Finance.
(8) The grades of staff and the number of staff of a subsidiary
shall be determined by the Agency, with the consent of the Ministerand the Minister for Finance.
(9) A member of the staff of a subsidiary holds office or employ-
ment subject to such terms and conditions as are approved by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Finance.
(10) The directors of a subsidiary shall be appointed and may be
removed from office by the Agency with the prior approval of theMinister given with the consent of the Minister for Finance.
(11) If a person who is both a director of a subsidiary and a direc-
tor of the Agency is removed under section 14(6) from office as a
director of the Agency or ceases under section 23 to hold such office,
that person immediately ceases to be a director of the subsidiary.
(12) The Minister may, by order, designate a subsidiary that com-
plies with the requirements of this section as a subsidiary whoseoperating costs and administrative expenses are to be paid out ofthe levy.
(13) Where any function of the Agency is, under the memor-
andum of association of a subsidiary, a function of the subsidiary,every provision of, or of any instrument under this Act or any otherenactment relating to the Agency shall, in respect of that function,apply to the subsidiary as it applies to the Agency.
17.—(1) The Agency may charge, receive and recover fees for
work undertaken by it on behalf of any person other than a Ministerof the Government.
(2) The Agency may recover, as a simple contract debt in any
court of competent jurisdiction, from any such person any amountdue and owing to it under subsection (1) .
18.—(1) The Agency may engage such consultants or advisers as
it considers necessary for performing its functions.
(2) Any fees due to a consultant or adviser engaged under this
section shall be paid by the Agency out of the levy.
19.—(1) There shall be a chief executive of the Agency.
(2) The chief executive shall be appointed and may be removed or
suspended from office by the directors appointed under section 14(2) .
(3) The chief executive holds office for such period and subject to
such terms and conditions (including terms and conditions relatingto remuneration and allowances for expenses) that the directors
13Pt.3 S.16
Power to charge
and recover fees.
Power to engage
consultants andadvisers.
Chief executive
(appointment andterm of office).Pt.3 S.19
Functions of chief
executive.
Staff of Agency.
14[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
appointed under section 14(2) may, with the approval of the Minister
given with the consent of the Minister for Finance, determine.
(4) The remuneration and allowances determined under subsec-
tion (3) and any superannuation benefits payable to or in respect of
the chief executive shall be paid by the Agency out of the levy.
(5) A person may be reappointed as chief executive subject to the
other provisions of this section.
(6) Where and for so long as the chief executive is suspended
from office, the chief executive is suspended from being a directorof the Agency.
20.—(1) The functions of the chief executive are—
(a) to carry on, manage and control generally the admini-
stration and business of the Agency, and
(b) to perform any other functions that may be determined by
the directors.
(2) The chief executive is responsible to the board of directors for
the performance of his or her functions and the implementation ofthe board’s policies.
(3) The chief executive shall provide the directors with such infor-
mation, including financial information, in relation to the perform-ance of his or her functions as the directors may require.
(4) The functions of the chief executive may be performed in his
or her absence or when the position of chief executive is vacant bysuch member of the staff of the Agency as may be designated forthat purpose by the directors.
(5) The person designated under subsection (4) to perform func-
tions of the chief executive is not entitled to act as a director ofthe Agency.
(6) The directors may at any time revoke or alter a designation
made under subsection (4) .
(7) The chief executive shall not hold any other office or position
or carry on any business, trade or profession without the consent ofthe directors.
21.—(1) The Agency may, subject to a determination under sub-
section (2) , appoint persons to be members of its staff.
(2) The Agency shall, with the approval of the Minister given with
the consent of the Minister for Finance, determine—
(a) the terms and conditions of employment (including terms
and conditions relating to remuneration and allowances)of staff appointed under this section, and
(b) the grades and the numbers of staff of the Agency at
each grade.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(3) The remuneration and allowances of the members of the
Agency’s staff and any superannuation benefits payable to or inrespect of those members shall be paid by the Agency out of the levy.
(4) A member of staff of the Agency shall perform such duties as
the chief executive may assign to him or her.
(5) A person who, immediately before the commencement of this
section, was a member of staff of the Agency shall, subject to section
23(2) and the terms and conditions upon which he or she was
appointed, continue in employment as if appointed under subsec-
tion (1) .
22.—(1) The Agency shall prepare and submit to the Minister a
scheme, or more than one scheme, for granting superannuationbenefits to or in respect of such members of staff (including the chiefexecutive) of the Agency as it may think fit.
(2) A superannuation scheme shall fix the time and conditions of
retirement for all persons to or in respect of whom superannuationbenefits are payable under the scheme and different times and con-ditions may be fixed in respect of different classes of persons.
(3) A superannuation scheme submitted to the Minister under
this section shall, if approved by the Minister with the consent of theMinister for Finance, be carried out by the Agency in accordancewith its terms.
(4) A superannuation scheme may be amended or revoked by a
subsequent scheme prepared, submitted and approved under thissection.
(5) The Agency may not grant, or enter into any arrangement for
the provision of any superannuation benefit to or in respect of amember of staff (including the chief executive) of the Agency exceptin accordance with a superannuation scheme approved under thissection or approved by the Minister with the consent of the Ministerfor Finance.
(6) Each superannuation scheme shall include provision for
appeals from a decision relating to a superannuation benefit underthe scheme.
(7) The Minister shall ensure that a superannuation scheme
approved under this section, including an amendment of a scheme,is laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicableafter it is approved.
(8) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by a resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which the superannuationscheme is laid before it, annul the scheme.
(9) The annulment of a superannuation scheme under subsection
(8)takes effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-
cerned, but does not affect the validity of anything done under thescheme before the passing of the resolution.
(10) A scheme for granting superannuation benefits to or in
respect of members of the staff of the Agency that is in existenceimmediately before the passing of this Act and that has been
15Pt.3 S.21
Superannuation.Pt.3 S.22
Membership of
either House ofOireachtas,EuropeanParliament or localauthority.
Unauthorised
disclosure ofconfidentialinformation.
16[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
approved by the Minister with the consent of the Minister for Fin-
ance is deemed to have been submitted and approved under thissection.
23.—(1) A director of the Agency (including the chief executive)
immediately ceases to hold office on—
(a) being nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) being elected as a member of either House of the
Oireachtas or of the European Parliament,
(c) being regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European
Parliament Elections Act 1997, as having been elected tothe European Parliament to fill a vacancy, or
(d) becoming a member of a local authority.
(2) A member of staff of the Agency is immediately seconded
from employment with the Agency on—
(a) being nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) being elected as a member of either House of the
Oireachtas or of the European Parliament, or
(c) being regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European
Parliament Elections Act 1997, as having been elected tothe European Parliament to fill a vacancy.
(3) No remuneration or allowances are payable by the Agency in
respect of the secondment period to a person seconded under subsec-
tion (2) from employment, and that period is not to be counted as
service with the Agency for the purposes of any superannuationbenefit.
(4) In relation to a person seconded under subsection (2) from
employment, the secondment period begins on the occurrence of therelevant event referred to in that subsection and ends when the per-son ceases to be a member of either House of the Oireachtas or ofthe European Parliament.
(5) A person who is entitled under the Standing Orders of either
House of the Oireachtas to sit in that House or who is a member ofthe European Parliament is, while so entitled or such a member, noteligible to become a director of the Agency or to be employed inany capacity by the Agency.
24.—(1) Except in the circumstances specified in subsection (2) ,
a person shall not disclose confidential information obtained whileperforming functions as—
(a) a director of the Agency,
(b) a member of a committee of the Agency,
(c) the chief executive or any other member of staff of the
Agency,
(d) an authorised officer,[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(e) a person engaged by the Agency as a consultant or
adviser, or
(f) an employee of a person referred to in paragraph (e) .
(2) A person does not contravene subsection (1) by disclosing con-
fidential information if—
(a) the Agency authorises its disclosure,
(b) the disclosure is made to the Agency,
(c) the disclosure is made to the Minister by or on behalf of
the Agency or in compliance with a requirement of thisAct, or
(d) the disclosure is otherwise required by law.
(3) In this section “confidential information” means—
(a) information that is expressed by the Agency to be confi-
dential either as regards particular information or asregards information of a particular class or description,and
(b) proposals of a commercial nature or tenders submitted to
the Agency by a contractor, a consultant or any otherperson.
25.—(1) The Agency shall, following consultation with the Mini-
ster, draw up a code of conduct in respect of proper standards ofintegrity, conduct and concern for the public interest to be main-tained by a person while performing functions as—
(a) a director of the Agency,
(b) a member of a committee of the Agency,
(c) the chief executive or any other member of staff of the
Agency,
(d) a consultant or adviser engaged by the Agency, or
(e) an employee of a person referred to in paragraph (d) .
(2) The Agency shall publish any code of conduct drawn up under
this section.
26.—(1) The Agency may, subject to subsections (2) and (3), raise
or borrow money (including money in a currency other than the cur-rency of the State) by means of the issue of debentures or otherwise,for the purpose of providing for current or capital purposes.
(2) The aggregate amount at any time of money raised or bor-
rowed under this section shall not exceed \1 billion.
(3) No money may be raised or borrowed under this section
except with the prior approval of the Minister given with the consentof the Minister for Finance and subject to such terms and conditionsas they may determine.
17Pt.3 S.24
Code of conduct.
Power to borrow.Pt.3 S.26
Temporary
borrowing.
Annual report.
Accounts and audit.
18[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(4) The terms on which money may be raised or borrowed under
this section may include—
(a) provisions charging all or part of the money raised or bor-
rowed and any related financial obligation (includinginterest) on all property, of whatever kind, being theassets for the time being of the Agency, or on any part-icular property, and
(b) provisions establishing the priority of such charges
among themselves.
(5) For the purposes of this section and section 27 money raised
or borrowed in a currency other than the currency of the State isdeemed to be the equivalent in the currency of the State of the actualmoney raised or borrowed, such equivalent being calculated accord-ing to the rate of exchange, at the time the money is raised or bor-rowed, for that currency and the currency of the State.
(6) The limit on borrowings provided for under subsection (2)
applies to the aggregate at any one time of borrowings of the Agencyand all subsidiaries.
27.—The Agency may, with the prior approval of the Minister
given with the consent of the Minister for Finance, borrow tempor-arily by arrangement with bankers or otherwise such sums of money(including money in a currency other than the currency of the State)as it may require for the purpose of providing for currentexpenditure.
28.—(1) The Agency shall submit an annual report of its activities
and those of any subsidiaries after the end of the financial year towhich the report relates.
(2) Each annual report shall be in such form and include infor-
mation regarding such matters as the Minister may direct.
(3) The Minister shall cause copies of the annual report to be laid
before each House of the Oireachtas not later than 6 months afterthe end of the financial year to which the report relates.
29.—(1) Without prejudice to the requirements of the Companies
Acts in relation to proper books of account, the Agency shall keep,in such form as may be approved by the Minister with the consentof the Minister for Finance, all proper books and records ofaccount of—
(a) all income received by it including the sources,
(b) all expenditure incurred by it, and
(c) its assets and liabilities.
(2) The Agency shall submit its accounts annually to the
Comptroller and Auditor General for audit at such times as the Mini-ster, with the consent of the Minister for Finance, shall direct.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(3) After the audit, the Agency shall present to the Minister the
audited accounts together with the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral’s report.
(4) The Minister shall cause copies of the documents presented
under subsection (3) to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas
not later than 6 months after the end of the financial year to whichthe audited accounts relate.
30.—(1) If required by the Minister, the Agency shall provide the
Minister with information in relation to such matters as he or shemay specify concerning or relating to—
(a) the performance of its functions (including those perfor-
med through a subsidiary),
(b) its plans for the future performance of its functions,
(c) any strategy statement that has been laid before each
House of the Oireachtas under section 15 ,
(d) any report or account prepared by it under sections 28 or
29,
(e) the economy and efficiency of use of the Agency in the
use of its resources,
(f) the systems, procedures and practices employed by the
Agency for the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness ofits operations, or
(g) the policy and activities, other than day-to-day activities,
of the Agency and of any subsidiaries.
(2) Information required by the Minister under subsection (1)
shall be provided in such form and within such period as the Ministermay direct.
31.—(1) Whenever required to do so by the Committee of Da ´il
E´ireann established under the Standing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann to
examine and report to Da ´il E´ireann on the appropriation accounts
and reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General, the chiefexecutive shall give evidence to that Committee on all matters per-taining to the expenditure of the Agency and any of its subsidiaries.
(2) Whenever requested to do so by a committee (other than the
Committee referred to in subsection (1) ) of one or both Houses of
the Oireachtas, the chief executive shall account to such committeefor the performance of the functions of the Agency and any of itssubsidiaries.
PART 4
Maintenance of Oil Stocks
32.—(1) The Agency shall maintain at the Minister’s disposal,
such oil stocks as will secure that at all times, subject to section 35 ,
national oil reserves are maintained at—
19Pt.3 S.29
Information to
Minister onperformance offunctions.
Information to
Oireachtas onperformance offunctions.
Duty of Agency.Pt.4 S.32
Holding contracts.
Duties of Minister.
Release of oil
stocks in cases ofparticular urgency.
20[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(a) a level sufficient to comply with the State’s stockholding
obligations, or
(b) such higher level as the Minister may, by written direction,
specify if he or she considers it necessary to do so for theeffective performance of the Agency’s functions.
(2) The Agency may carry out its duty under subsection (1) by—
(a) holding the oil stocks itself, or
(b) entering into holding contracts.
33.—(1) A holding contract is a contract between the Agency and
another person by which that other person undertakes to hold at thedisposal of the Agency an agreed volume of oil stocks (whether ornot owned by the Agency) for the purposes of the Agency’sfunctions.
(2) A holding contract may provide for the agreed volume of oil
stocks to be held—
(a) inside the State, or
(b) outside the State in the territory of another state in accord-
ance with a bilateral agreement.
(3) Before entering into a holding contract providing for oil stocks
to be held outside the State in accordance with a bilateral agreement,the Agency shall submit its proposals to the Minister for approval.
(4) Before deciding whether to give or withhold approval of pro-
posals submitted under subsection (3) , the Minister shall have regard
to such factors as he or she considers appropriate, including any needfor particular categories of oil stocks to be held within the State.
34.—(1) The Minister shall, in accordance with the State’s stock-
holding obligations, from time to time determine the extent to which,and the manner in which, crude oil, intermediate products and differ-ent categories of petroleum products may be taken into account—
(a) in calculating national oil reserves, and
(b) in determining the volume of oil stocks to be maintained
by the Agency in order to carry out its duty undersection 32 .
(2) The Minister shall keep the Agency informed of the volume
of oil stocks, calculated by reference to the information supplied tothe Minister in accordance with the regulations relating to returns,that the Agency must maintain to comply with its duty undersection 32 .
35.—(1) If the Minister considers that a case of particular urgency
exists and that it is necessary for the compliance by the State withits stockholding obligations to do so, he or she shall notify theAgency that the oil stocks maintained by it may be reduced belowthe level required under section 32 for such period and to such level
as the Minister may, in writing, direct.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(2) After consulting the Agency, the Minister may, in writing—
(a) issue a direction specifying the procedures to be applied
by the Agency for releasing such oil stocks, and
(b) authorise the Agency to release oil stocks in accordance
with those procedures.
PART 5
Levy on Relevant Disposals of Petroleum Products
36.—In this Part—
“expenses” means the operating costs and administrative expenses of
the Agency and each designated subsidiary, including the following:
(a) oil storage costs;
(b) the costs of holding under a holding contract oil stocks not
owned by the Agency;
(c) the remuneration, if any, and allowances for expenses of
the directors;
(d) the remuneration and allowances for expenses of the chief
executive and any superannuation benefits payable to orin respect of him or her;
(e) the remuneration and allowances of the members of staff
and any superannuation benefits payable to or in respectof such members;
(f) fees due to any consultants or advisers engaged under
this Act;
(g) the costs incurred by the Agency in collecting the levy;
(h) the payment of any interest and other bank charges
incurred on borrowings under sections 26 and 27;
(i) the repayment of principal borrowed under section 26 or
27to purchase oil or to do anything specified in section
8(3)(a) ,(b),(c)or(f);
“levy assessment notice” means a notice issued under section 41 ;
“marine bunkers” means petroleum products that are exempt from
excise duty as being intended for the fuel tanks of sea-going vessels;
“petroleum products” does not include marine bunkers, aviation fuel
and jet fuel of the kerosene type;
“relevant disposal of petroleum products” has the meaning assigned
bysection 37(2) ;
“volume assessment” means an assessment under section 39 of rel-
evant disposals of petroleum products.
21Pt.4 S.35
Definitions for
Part 5 .Pt.5
Liability of oil
companies and oilconsumers to paylevy.
Exemptions from
levy.
Volume assessment.
22[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
37.—(1) For the purpose of meeting expenses properly incurred,
or likely to be so incurred, by the Agency and each designated sub-sidiary in performing functions under this Act, oil companies and oilconsumers shall, in accordance with this Part and the regulationsunder section 44 , pay to the Agency in each month a levy on their
relevant disposals of petroleum products in the preceding month.
(2) A relevant disposal of petroleum products is the volume
(expressed in tonnes or litres) of petroleum products that in anymonth—
(a) in relation to an oil company, it consumes or it disposes of
by sale or otherwise to persons in the State, and
(b) in relation to an oil consumer, it consumes in the State.
(3) No levy is payable by an oil company (other than an oil com-
pany operating an oil refining or oil storage facility in the State) oran oil consumer on its relevant disposals of petroleum productswhere the levy has been paid by the oil company from which itacquired the petroleum products.
38.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , no levy is payable in any month
by an oil consumer that, throughout the preceding month, heldwithin the State stocks of petroleum products owned by it thatequalled or exceeded—
(a) 55 times the average volume of those products consumed
by it on each day in the preceding calendar year, or
(b) such other daily volume as may be prescribed by the Mini-
ster for the purpose of securing supplies of oil in accord-ance with the State’s stockholding obligations or with itsnational requirements.
(2) In calculating for the purposes of this section stocks of pet-
roleum products held throughout the preceding month by an oil con-sumer, the Minister shall not take into account any volume of pet-roleum products held within the State on behalf of the oil consumerunder a contract between the oil consumer and another person,unless—
(a) the contract provides for an agreed volume of petroleum
products owned by the oil consumer to be so held by theother person for the purpose of a claim by the oil con-sumer for exemption from levy under this section, and
(b) before the contract was entered into, the contract pro-
posals (within the meaning assigned by section 62 ) were
submitted to the Minister.
(3) An oil consumer that claims exemption from levy under this
section shall supply to the Minister, in accordance with and withinthe time specified in the regulations relating to returns, all infor-mation relevant to the exemption claimed.
39.—(1) Before the end of each month, the Minister shall notify
the Agency of the Minister’s assessment of the volume of each cate-gory of petroleum products appearing to have been relevantly dis-posed of in the preceding month by each oil company and oil con-sumer liable to pay the levy.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(2) The volume assessment is to be based on—
(a) the information supplied by the oil company or oil con-
sumer in accordance with the regulations relating toreturns, or
(b) if that information has not been supplied or if the Minister
has reason to believe that information so supplied is inac-curate or incomplete in any material respect, suchestimates as appear to the Minister to be reasonable hav-ing regard to any other available information.
40.—(1) The Minister shall calculate in accordance with this
section the amount of levy payable in respect of a month by each oilcompany and oil consumer liable to pay the levy on its relevant dis-posals in the month and shall notify the Agency of that amount.
(2) The amount of levy shall be calculated by reference to—
(a) the oil company’s or the oil consumer’s relevant disposals
of petroleum products (including, where appropriate, ofeach category of petroleum products) in the month asspecified in its volume assessment for the month, and
(b) the rate of levy prescribed under section 44 for the month.
41.—The Agency shall give each oil company and oil consumer
liable to pay the levy in respect of a month a levy assessmentnotice specifying—
(a) the oil company’s or oil consumer’s relevant disposals of
petroleum products as specified in its volume assessmentfor that month,
(b) the rate of levy prescribed under section 44 for the month
and, where appropriate, for each category of petroleumproducts specified in that assessment,
(c) the amount of the levy payable by it in respect of that
month as calculated under section 40 ,
(d) the date, determined in accordance with the regulations,
on which the levy becomes payable, and
(e) where appropriate, any exemption from levy in accordance
with section 38 .
42.—(1) If all or part of the amount specified in a levy assessment
notice is not paid on or before the date specified in the notice as thedate on which the amount becomes payable, interest on the unpaidamount accrues at the rate prescribed under section 44 from that
date to the date of payment.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) , interest does not accrue on an
amount that in a review under section 44(1)(e) the Minister deter-
mines is not payable.
23Pt.5 S.39
Calculation of levy.
Levy assessment
notice.
Interest on unpaid
amount ofassessment.Pt.5
Recovery of unpaid
levy and interest.
Regulations relating
to levy.
24[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
43.—The Agency may recover, as a simple contract debt in any
court of competent jurisdiction, from the oil company or oil con-sumer by whom it is payable any amount due and owing to it underthis Part in respect of the levy and any interest that has accrued onthat amount.
44.—(1) The Minister may, by regulations, provide for all or any
of the following matters relating to the levy:
(a) the rate of levy per tonne or litre of relevant disposals of
petroleum products;
(b) the daily volume of petroleum products to be held by an
oil consumer for the purposes referred to in section
38(1)(b) ;
(c) the manner in which levy assessment notices are to be pre-
pared by the Agency;
(d) the keeping by oil companies and oil consumers of speci-
fied records in respect of matters connected with liabilityto pay the levy and the specifying of the form in whichand the period for which such records are to be kept;
(e) the review by the Minister of a levy assessment notice at
the request of an oil company or oil consumer that claimsthat the notice is erroneous;
(f) the time within which a request for such review shall be
made and the conditions to be satisfied by an oil companyor oil consumer before the request can be made;
(g) the manner in which the amount of any overpayment or
underpayment made by an oil company or oil consumerin respect of the levy may be set off against or added toany subsequent liability of such oil company or oil con-sumer to the Agency;
(h) the times at which payment becomes due;
(i) the form in which payment is to be made to the Agency
by an oil company or oil consumer;
(j) the rate of interest on amounts not paid when due;
(k) such other matters as are necessary for or incidental to the
imposition, payment and collection of the levy.
(2) Different rates of levy may be prescribed by the Minister for
different categories of petroleum products and in relation to differ-ent months.
(3) In determining the rates of levy, the Minister shall seek to
ensure that (taking one year with another) the sums realised byapplying those rates to the volume assessments meet but do notexceed the estimated expenses of the Agency and of each desig-nated subsidiary.
(4) For the purpose of determining in any year such estimated
expenses of the Agency, the Minister may—[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(a) consider the information contained in the Agency’s
strategy statement,
(b) have regard to such information as is provided under
section 29 , and
(c) take account of the expenses of the Agency and of each
designated subsidiary in the previous financial year, andof any additional expenditure likely to be incurred by anyof them in the forthcoming financial year.
(5) The rate of levy determined under Regulation 6(4) of the
European Communities (Minimum Stocks of Petroleum Oils) Regu-lations 1995 (S.I. No. 96 of 1995) and in effect immediately beforethe revocation of those Regulations by section 56 is deemed to have
been prescribed under this section and continues in effect until it isvaried under this section.
(6) If the prescribed rate of levy is varied, the new rate of levy
takes effect no earlier than 3 months after the making of the regu-lation varying the prescribed rate.
(7) Regulations under subsection (1)(j) may prescribe a formula
for determining the interest rate by reference to—
(a) the prevailing Euro Interbank Offered Rate,
(b) an additional rate certified by the Central Bank and Finan-
cial Services Authority of Ireland, and
(c) such other additional rate as the Minister considers appro-
priate taking into account the cost of recovering unpaidlevy, including any bank charges the Agency may incurin maintaining a bank overdraft to cover a shortfall infunds arising out of unpaid levy.
PART 6
Enforcement Provisions
45.—In this Part—
“premises” means any place, ship or other vessel, aircraft, railway
wagon or other vehicle and includes any container, storage tank orpipeline used for holding, storing or transporting oil;
“relevant activity” means—
(a) any activity connected with the Agency, an oil company
or oil consumer, and
(b) any activity connected with the holding of oil stocks in
the State on behalf of another state in accordance with abilateral agreement.
46.—(1) The following persons are authorised officers for the pur-
poses of this Act:
(a) any officer of Customs and Excise;
25Pt.5 S.44
Definitions for Part
6.
Authorised officers.Pt.6 S.46
Powers of
authorised officers.
26[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(b) an auditor appointed by the Agency with the consent of
the Minister;
(c) any other person (including an officer of the Minister or
the Agency) appointed by the Minister.
(2) An appointment under subsection (1)(b) or(c)may, subject
tosubsection (3) , be for a fixed period for the purposes of all or any
of the provisions of this Act.
(3) Where the exercise of the powers conferred under section 47
orsection 48 relate to a relevant activity of the Agency, such powers
may not be exercised by a person appointed by the Agency or anofficer of the Agency.
(4) A person appointed to be an authorised officer under subsec-
tion (1)(b) or(c)shall, on appointment, be provided with a certificate
of appointment issued—
(a) in the case of a person appointed under subsection (1)(b) ,
by the Agency, and
(b) in the case of a person appointed under subsection (1)(c) ,
by the Minister.
(5) An authorised officer, when exercising a power conferred on
him or her by this Act shall, if requested by a person affected by theexercise of such power, produce the certificate of his or her appoint-ment to that person.
(6) An appointment under this section as an authorised officer
ceases—
(a) if made by the Agency, on the Agency revoking the
appointment,
(b) if made by the Minister, on the Minister revoking the
appointment,
(c) if for a fixed period, on the expiry of that period, or
(d) if the person is an officer of Customs and Excise or an
officer of the Minister or the Agency, on that personceasing to be such officer.
(7) A person who immediately before the commencement of this
section was an authorised officer under the European Communities(Minimum Stocks of Petroleum Oils) Regulations 1995 (S.I. No. 96of 1995) is deemed to have been appointed under this section.
47.—(1) For the purpose of obtaining any information necessary
for the performance by the Minister or the Agency of their functionsunder this Act (including any functions relating to the holding of oilstocks in the State on behalf of another state in accordance witha bilateral agreement), an authorised officer may do any or all ofthe following:
(a) at all reasonable times enter and inspect any premises at
or by means of which a relevant activity is carried on orin which records in relation to such activity are kept;[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(b) at such premises, inspect any books, records or other docu-
ments (including documents stored in non-legible form)that the officer finds in the course of the inspection, andtake copies of them or extracts from them;
(c) direct that such books, records or other documents found
at the premises be retained for such period as may bereasonable for further examination;
(d) remove from the premises any such books, records or
other documents and retain them for such period as theofficer reasonably considers to be necessary for furtherexamination;
(e) require the owner or person in charge of the premises or
any person whom the officer reasonably believes to beemployed there to give to the officer such assistance andinformation, and to produce to him or her such books,records or other documents (and in the case of docu-ments stored in non-legible form, produce to the officerlegible reproductions of them) that are in that person’spower or procurement, as the officer may reasonablyrequire;
(f) carry out, or have carried out, such examinations, inspec-
tions, tests and measurements of oil, plant, equipment,storage tanks, pipelines or any other equipment orappliances at the premises as the officer considersappropriate;
(g) remove, or have removed, from the premises any such oil,
equipment or appliance and retain them for such periodas the officer reasonably considers to be necessary forfurther examination;
(h) secure for later inspection any premises or part of any
premises in which a relevant activity is carried on or inwhich records in relation to such activity are kept;
(i) take photographs or make any record or visual recording
of any relevant activity carried on at such premises.
(2) Any information obtained by an auditor appointed under
section 46(1)(b) shall be given directly to the Minister who, if he or
she considers it appropriate for the purpose of the effective perform-ance of the Agency’s functions, may pass on all or any of that infor-mation to the Agency.
(3) Where an authorised officer in exercise of his or her powers
under this section is prevented from entering any premises, an appli-cation may be made under section 48 for a warrant authorising such
entry.
(4) An authorised officer shall not, other than with the consent of
the occupier, enter a private dwelling unless the officer has obtaineda warrant under section 48 authorising such entry.
(5) An authorised officer who has reasonable grounds to believe
that a person has committed an offence under this Act may requirethat person to provide the officer with his or her name and theaddress at which he or she ordinarily resides.
27Pt.6 S.47Pt.6
Search warrants.
Duty of authorised
officers to reportcertain matters.
28[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
48.—(1) A Judge of the District Court may issue a search warrant
if satisfied on the sworn information of an authorised officer thatthere are reasonable grounds for suspecting that informationrequired by an authorised officer for the purpose of the performanceby the Minister or the Agency of their functions under this Act is tobe found at any premises where a relevant activity is carried on.
(2) A search warrant issued under this section shall be expressed
and operate to authorise a named authorised officer, accompaniedby such authorised officers and members of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na as
the named officer thinks necessary, at any time or times, within 28days of the date of issue of the warrant, on production, if sorequested, of the warrant, to enter (if need be by reasonable force)such premises as are specified in the warrant.
(3) Where any premises are entered by an authorised officer pur-
suant to a warrant issued under this section, the officer may, inrelation to those premises, exercise all or any of the powers con-ferred on an authorised officer under section 47 .
49.—(1) An authorised officer who, after entering premises under
section 47 or under the authority of a warrant issued under section
48, forms the opinion in the course of exercising his or her powers
under section 47 that—
(a) a relevant activity has been or is being carried on by any
person at the premises otherwise than in compliance witha regulatory provision, or
(b) there is a risk to the health, safety or welfare of any
employees at work on the premises,
shall report the matter to the appropriate authority.
(2) In this section—
“appropriate authority” means—
(a) a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
(b) the Health and Safety Authority,
(c) the Environmental Protection Agency,
(d) the local authority in whose administrative area the prem-
ises are located, or
(e) the Revenue Commissioners;
“regulatory provision” means—
(a) any provision that is contained in or made under an enact-
ment passed for the protection of employees, the protec-tion of the environment or the regulation of planning anddevelopment, or
(b) any provision of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of the Finance Act
1999 or of a regulation made under section 104 of thatAct.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
50.—A person is guilty of an offence under this section if the
person—
(a) obstructs, impedes or assaults an authorised officer in the
exercise of a power conferred under section 47 ,
(b) without reasonable excuse, fails or refuses to comply with
a direction or requirement of an authorised officer undersection 47(1)(c) or(e),
(c) without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with section
62(4)(b) ,
(d) alters, suppresses or destroys any books, records or docu-
ments (including documents stored in non-legible form)that the person has been required to produce or mayreasonably expect to produce,
(e) gives to an authorised officer information that the person
knows to be false or misleading in a material respect, or
(f) falsely represents himself or herself to be an authorised
officer.
51.—Where the Agency is satisfied that any member of staff of
the Agency or an authorised officer appointed by it has carried outhis or her duties in relation to the enforcement of the provisions ofthis Act in good faith, the Agency shall indemnify such member ofstaff or such authorised officer against all actions or claims that mayarise in carrying out those duties.
PART 7
Amendments and Revocation
52.—Section 7 of the Act of 2001 is amended—
(a) by deleting subsection (1),
(b) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (2):
“(2) Notwithstanding any enactment or rule of law or
any provision contained in the memorandum or articles ofassociation of the Corporation, the Minister may, by order,direct the Corporation to transfer all or any of its assetsor liabilities or both to the Minister or other public auth-ority on such terms and conditions as the Minister afterconsulting with the Minister for Finance thinks fit.”,
(c) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (3):
“(3) Amounts (if any) paid by the Minister in respect
of a transfer directed under subsection (2) shall be repaidto the Central Fund out of monies provided by theOireachtas.”,
and
(d) by deleting subsection (4).
29Pt.6
Offences.
Indemnification.
Amendment of
section 7 of Act of2001.Pt.7
Amendment of
section 8 of Act of2001.
Amendment of
section 9 of Act of2001.
Amendment of
Third Schedule toFreedom ofInformation Act1997.
Revocation.
Regulations to give
effect to acts ofEuropeanCommunities.
Regulations and
orders.
30[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
53.—Section 8 of the Act of 2001 is amended—
(a) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (5):
“(5) Notwithstanding any enactment or rule of law, the
Corporation shall not be liable to repay to the Ministerany amount paid by the Minister under the provisions ofthe guarantee referred to in subsection (1).”,
and
(b) by deleting subsection (6).
54.—The following section is substituted for section 9 of the Act
of 2001:
“Alteration of
memorandumand articles ofassociation ofCorporation.9.—The Corporation shall take such steps as
may be necessary under the Companies Acts toalter its memorandum and articles of associationfor the purpose of making them consistent withthis Act.”.
55.—The Third Schedule to the Freedom of Information Act 1997
is amended by inserting at the end of Part I—
(a) in column (2), “ National Oil Reserves Agency Act 2007 .”,
and
(b) in column (3), opposite the mention in column (2) of the
National Oil Reserves Agency Act 2007 ,“section 24 .”.
56.—The European Communities (Minimum Stocks of Petroleum
Oils) Regulations 1995 (S.I. No. 96 of 1995) are revoked.
PART 8
Miscellaneous Provisions
57.—The power to make regulations under this Act includes the
power to make provision in such regulations to give effect to—
(a) a provision of the treaties of the European Communities,
or
(b) an act adopted by an institution of those Communities.
58.—(1) The Minister may make regulations—
(a) for any purpose in relation to which regulations are pro-
vided for in this Act,
(b) for prescribing any matter or thing referred to in this Act
as prescribed or to be prescribed, and
(c) generally for the purpose of giving effect to this Act.[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(2) The Minister may make orders for any matter in relation to
which orders are provided for in this Act.
59.—(1) The Minister may make regulations—
(a) for the purposes of Parts 4 and 5, requiring the Agency,
oil companies and oil consumers to supply the Ministerwith written returns in each month, and
(b) for the purposes of a bilateral agreement, requiring per-
sons holding oil stocks in the State on behalf of anotherstate in accordance with that agreement to supply theMinister with written returns as and when required bythe Minister.
(2) Regulations under this section may, among other things, make
provision for the following matters:
(a) the information to be contained in returns;
(b) requirements relating to the certification of returns;
(c) the dates by which returns are to be supplied;
(d) the form in which returns are to be supplied;
(e) for the purpose of section 61 , procedures for making rep-
resentations to the Minister.
(3) A person is guilty of an offence under this section if the
person—
(a) fails to supply for a period of 3 consecutive months from
the applicable date required under subsection (2)(c) a
return in such form and containing such information as isrequired under subsection (2)(a) ,o r
(b) provides in a return information that is false or misleading
in a material respect and that the person knows is falseor misleading.
60.—(1) Every regulation and order made under this Act shall be
laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable afterit is made.
(2) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a regulation or an order(other than an order under section 1(2) ,4or5) was laid before it in
accordance with subsection (1) , annul the regulation or order.
(3) The annulment of a regulation or order under this section
takes effect immediately on the passing of the resolution concerned,but does not affect anything that was done under the regulation ororder before the passing of the resolution.
31Pt.8 S.58
Minister’s power to
make regulationsrelating to returns.
Laying of
regulations andorders beforeHouses ofOireachtas.Pt.8
Power of Minister
to apply forcompliance orderand issue directions.
Minister’s prior
approval requiredfor certaincontracts, holdingcontract obligations,etc.
32[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
61.—(1) If it appears to the Minister that a person has failed to
comply with any requirement of regulations relating to returns theMinister, having afforded the person the opportunity to make rep-resentations to him or her in accordance with procedures prescribedunder section 59(2)(e) , may—
(a) apply to the High Court for an order under subsection
(3),o r
(b) give to the person such directions as the Minister thinks
fit for securing compliance with the relevant requirement.
(2) Before making an application under subsection (1)(a) , the
Minister shall give the person concerned a notice in writing specify-ing the nature of the default and giving the person a period of 14days after being notified of the default within which to make goodthe default.
(3) If satisfied on application under subsection (1)(a) that the per-
son concerned has failed to comply with such requirement, the HighCourt may make an order requiring that person to comply with therequirement.
62.—(1) An oil company or oil consumer shall submit contract
proposals to the Minister for approval before it enters into a contractwith a person (other than the Agency) by which the oil company orthe oil consumer, as the case may be, undertakes to hold in the Statein accordance with a bilateral agreement an agreed volume of oilstocks in respect of the other person’s stockholding obligations.
(2) Before deciding whether to give or withhold approval of pro-
posals submitted under subsection (1) , the Minister shall have regard
to such factors as he or she considers appropriate, including—
(a) the level of national oil reserves, and
(b) the availability of adequate holding facilities in the State
for the purpose of meeting the State’s stockholdingobligations.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) , the Minister may seek the
advice of the Agency in relation to the matters referred to in para-
graphs (a) and (b)of that subsection.
(4) ( a) Where a contract to which subsection (1) relates has been
entered into by an oil company or an oil consumer tohold oil stocks in the State in accordance with a bilateralagreement, then the oil stocks concerned shall be so heldby such oil company or oil consumer.
(b) Where in respect of oil stocks a holding contract has been
entered into by a person with the Agency and such con-tract in whole or in part relates to holding of oil stocksin the State, then, subject to paragraph (c) , the oil stocks
to be held in the State under such contract shall be soheld by such person.
(c) Oil stocks maintained in the State for the purposes of
paragraph (b) shall be so maintained—[2007.] [ No. 7.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(i) where duly held in conjunction with an oil refining
business carried on in the State, as a specific amountof non-identified oil, and
(ii) in any other case, as a specific amount of identified
oil which may not be drawn upon or replenished(except by the Agency), but without prejudice to thereplacement of the oil from time to time, with theprior consent of the Agency, for the purpose of avo-iding degradation of quality.
(5) In this section and section 38 “contract proposals” means—
(a) the name and address of the parties to the contract to hold
oil stocks,
(b) the nature and quantity of the stocks,
(c) the location where the stocks are to be held,
(d) the period for which the stocks are to be held, and
(e) such other information as the Minister may require under
the State’s stockholding obligations.
63.—Where in proceedings for the recovery of levy a dispute arises
as to whether no levy is payable by virtue of section 37(3) or as to
whether the terms and conditions have been met for claiming anexemption from levy in accordance with section 38 , the burden of
proof rests with the defendant oil company or oil consumer.
64.—(1) Summary proceedings for an offence may be brought
and prosecuted—
(a) in relation to an offence under section 50 , by the Minister
or the Agency, and
(b) in relation to an offence under section 59 , by the Minister.
(2) Notwithstanding section 10(4) of the Petty Sessions (Ireland)
Act 1851, proceedings for an offence under this Act may beinstituted at any time within 2 years from the date of the allegedcommission of the offence.
65.—Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body
corporate and is proved to have been committed with the consent orconnivance of or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of aperson being a director, manager, secretary or other officer of thebody corporate or a person who was purporting to act in any suchcapacity, that person, as well as the body corporate, is guilty of anoffence and is liable to be proceeded against and punished as if heor she were guilty of the first-mentioned offence.
66.—(1) A person guilty of an offence under this Act is liable on
summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months or both.
33Pt.8 S.62
Burden of proof in
certain proceedings.
Prosecution of
offences.
Offences by bodies
corporate.
Penalties.Pt.8 S.66
Giving of notices.
34[No. 7.] [2007.] National Oil Reserves Agency Act
2007 .
(2) If the contravention in respect of which a person is convicted
of an offence under this Act continues after the conviction, the per-son is guilty of a further offence on every day on which the contra-vention continues and for each such offence the person is liable onsummary conviction to a fine not exceeding \250.
67.—(1) A notice required or permitted under this Act to be given
to a person is to be addressed to the person by name and may begiven to the person in one of the following ways:
(a) by delivering it to the person;
(b) by leaving it at the address at which the person ordinarily
resides or carries on business;
(c) by sending it by post in a pre-paid registered letter to the
address at which the person ordinarily resides or carrieson business;
(d) if an address has been provided by the person, by leaving
it at the address provided or sending it by pre-paid regis-tered post addressed to the person at that address;
(e) if the person giving the notice considers that notice should
be given immediately and a fax machine is located at anaddress mentioned in paragraph (b) or(d), by sending it
by fax to that machine but only if the sender’s faxmachine generates a message confirming successful trans-mission of the total number of pages of the notice.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a company registered under
the Companies Acts is deemed to be ordinarily resident at its regis-tered office, and every other body corporate and every unincorpor-ated body is deemed to be ordinarily resident at its principal officeor place of business.