————————
Number 24of2009
————————
HEALTH INSURANCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)
ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL
Section
1. Short title, collective citation and construction.
2. Definitions.
PART 2
AMENDMENT OF HEALTH INSURANCE ACT 1994
3. Principal objective of Minister and Authority in performing
respective functions under Act.
4. Amendment of section 2 of Act of 1994.5. Amendment of section 3 of Act of 1994.6. Substitution of section 7 of Act of 1994.
7. Amendment of section 7A of Act of 1994.8. Amendment of Act of 1994.9. Further amendment of Act of 1994.
10. Amendment of section 12A of Act of 1994.11. Regulations may specify information to be provided to policy
holders and potential policy holders of type of healthinsurance contract, etc.
12. Amendment of section 14 of Act of 1994.13. Amendment of section 17 of Act of 1994.14. Enforcement notices.
12[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
15. Amendment of section 20 of Act of 1994.
16. Amendment of section 21 of Act of 1994.17. Amendment of Schedule to Act of 1994.18. Insertion of Schedule 2 into Act of 1994.
PART 3
AMENDMENT OF TAXES CONSOLIDATION ACT 1997
19. Amendment of section 112A of Act of 1997.20. Amendment of section 458 of Act of 1997.21. Amendment of section 470 of Act of 1997.22. Age-related relief for health insurance premiums.23. Amendment of section 904E of Act of 1997.24. Amendment of section 1024 of Act of 1997.25. Amendment of Schedule 29 to Act of 1997.
PART 4
AMENDMENT OF STAMP DUTIES CONSOLIDATION ACT
1999
26. Levy on authorised insurers.
PART 5
AMENDMENT OF INSURANCE ACT 1936
27. Amendment of section 3 of Insurance Act 1936.
————————
Acts Referred to
Health Insurance Act 1994 1994, No. 16
Health Insurance Acts 1994 to 2007Income Tax ActsInsurance Act 1936 1936, No. 45Insurance Acts 1909 to 2000Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 2005, No. 26Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999 1999, No. 31Succession Duty Act 1853 16 & 17 Vict., c. 51Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39————————
Number 24of2009
————————
HEALTH INSURANCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)
ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND THE HEALTH INSURANCE ACT 1994,
THE TAXES CONSOLIDATION ACT 1997, THE STAMPDUTIES CONSOLIDATION ACT 1999 AND THEINSURANCE ACT 1936, IN PARTICULAR TO ENSURETHAT, IN THE INTERESTS OF SOCIETAL AND INTER-GENERATIONAL SOLIDARITY, THE BURDEN OF THECOSTS OF HEALTH SERVICES BE SHARED BYINSURED PERSONS BY PROVIDING FOR A COST SUB-SIDY BETWEEN THE YOUNG AND THE OLD; TOPROVIDE, HAVING REGARD TO THE PRINCIPALOBJECTIVE OF THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH ANDCHILDREN AND THE HEALTH INSURANCE AUTH-ORITY IN PERFORMING THEIR RESPECTIVE FUNC-TIONS UNDER THE HEALTH INSURANCE ACT 1994,FOR TAX CREDITS TO ENABLE THE OLD TO HAVEACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE COVER AND TOPROVIDE FOR A MEANS WHEREBY ANY OVERCOM-PENSATION ARISING FROM SUCH TAX CREDITS MAYBE REPAID; AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATEDMATTERS.
[19th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Health Insurance
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009.
(2) The Health Insurance Acts 1994 to 2007 and Part 2 may be
cited as the Health Insurance Acts 1994 to 2009 and shall be con-strued together as one.
(3) The Insurance Acts 1909 to 2000 and Part 5 may be cited as
the Insurance Acts 1909 to 2009.
3
Short title,
collective citationand construction.Pt.1
Definitions.
Principal objective
of Minister andAuthority inperformingrespective functionsunder Act.
Amendment of
section 2 of Act of1994.
4[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
2.—In this Act —
“Act of 1994 ”means the Health Insurance Act 1994;
“Act of 1997 ”means the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997.
PART 2
AMENDMENT OF HEALTH INSURANCE ACT 1994
3.—The Act of 1994 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 1:
“1A.—(1) The principal objective of the Minister and the
Authority in performing their respective functions under thisAct is to ensure, in the interests of the common good, that accessto health insurance cover is available to consumers of healthservices with no differentiation made between them (whethereffected by income tax or stamp duty measures or othermeasures, or any combination thereof), in particular as regardsthe costs of health services, based in whole or in part on therespective age range and general health status of the membersof any particular generation (or part thereof), and taking intoparticular account for the purposes of that objective —
(a) the fact that the health needs of consumers of health
services increase as they approach and enter old age,
(b) the desirability of ensuring, in the interests of societal
and intergenerational solidarity, and regardless ofthe age range or health status of any particular gen-eration (or any part thereof), that the burden of thecosts of health services be shared by insured personsby providing for a cost subsidy between the youngand the old and, without prejudice to the generalityof that objective, in particular that the old haveaccess to health insurance cover by means of a taxcredit, and
(c) the manner in which the health insurance market
operates in respect of health insurance contracts,both in relation to individual registered undertakingsand across the market.
(2) A registered undertaking shall not engage in a practice,
or effect an agreement (including a health insurance contract),which has as its object or effect (whether in whole or in part)the avoidance of the achievement of the principal objectivespecified in subsection (1).
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of
section 7(5) or 7A. ”.
4.—Section 2 of the Act of 1994 is amended, in subsection (1) —
(a) by substituting the following definitions for the definition
of“community rating ”:[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
“‘community rated health insurance contract ’means a
health insurance contract which complies with section 7(1)or which would comply with that section but for its fallingwithin section 7(5) or 7A;
‘community rating ’means measures which, whether in
whole or in part, apply towards the achievement of theprincipal objective specified in section 1A(1); ”,
(b) by inserting the following definition after the definition of
“day patient service ”:
“‘effect ’, in relation to a health insurance contract or other
agreement, means to enter into or renew such contract oragreement, as the case may be; ”.
(c) by inserting the following definition after the definition of
“in-patient indemnity payment ”:
“‘net premium ’, in relation to a health insurance contract,
means the premium payable under the contract in respectof an individual in any year of assessment after —
(a) the deduction made therefrom to which the
individual is entitled, for that year of assess-ment, by virtue of section 470 of the TaxesConsolidation Act 1997, and
(b) the deduction (if any) made therefrom to which
the individual is entitled, for that year ofassessment, by virtue of section 470B of theTaxes Consolidation Act 1997; ”,
(d) in the definition of “undertaking ”, by substituting “under-
taking; ”for“undertaking. ”, and
(e) by inserting the following definition after the definition
of“undertaking ”:
“‘year of assessment ’has the same meaning as in section
2 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997. ”.
5.—Section 3 of the Act of 1994 is amended, in subsection (4)( a),
by substituting 6A(2), 7A, 7B, 7F ”for“7A, 7B ”.
6.—The Act of 1994 is amended by substituting the following
sections for section 7:
“Interpretation
of Part II.6A.—(1) In this Part, unless the context other-
wise requires —
‘age group ’means age group as prescribed in regu-
lations made under section 7D;
‘age-related tax credit ’has the same meaning as in
section 470B(4) of the Taxes Consolidation Act1997;
5Pt.2 S.4
Amendment of
section 3 of Act of1994.
Substitution of
section 7 of Act of1994.Pt.2 S.6
6[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
‘cumulative net financial impact ’, in relation to a
registered undertaking or former registered under-taking which has furnished one or more infor-mation returns to the Authority in respect of aperiod, means the difference between —
(a) the total amount of the age-related tax
credits recorded in accounts for thatundertaking in respect of that periodas extracted from accounts furnishedpursuant to section 7F(1)( a) and ( b)t o
the Authority by the undertaking inrespect of that period, and
(b) the total amount of the stamp duty
referred to in section 125A of theStamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999recorded in accounts for that under-taking in respect of that period asextracted from accounts furnished pur-suant to section 7F(1)( a) and ( b)t ot h e
Authority by the undertaking inrespect of that period;
‘draft report ’has the meaning assigned to it by
section 7F(7);
‘information return ’means an information return
referred to in section 7D(1);
‘positive ’, in relation to the cumulative net finan-
cial impact on a registered undertaking or formerregistered undertaking which has submitted one ormore information returns to the Authority inrespect of a period, means that, for that period andthat undertaking, the amount specified in para-graph ( a) of the definition of ‘cumulative net fin-
ancial impact ’exceeds the amount specified in
paragraph ( b) of that definition;
‘relevant financial provisions ’means —
(a) section 470B of the Taxes Consolidation
Act 1997, or
(b) section 125A of the Stamp Duties Con-
solidation Act 1999,
or both;‘relevant market sector ’, in relation to information
returns made to the Authority for any period of 6months referred to in section 7D(1), means all theregistered undertakings or former registeredundertakings which have made those returns;
‘relevant period ’has the meaning assigned to it by
section 7D(1)(b).
(2) Reasonable profit shall be determined
under section 7F(4) in accordance with —[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(a) Article 18 of the Community framework
for State aid in the form of publicservice compensation (2005/C297/04)
1
(the text of which is set out for con-venience of reference in Schedule 2),and
(b) any factors that are prescribed as factors
that may be taken into account for thepurposes of so determining reasonableprofit in accordance with the saidArticle.
Prohibition of
non-communityrated healthinsurancecontracts.7.—(1) Subject to subsection (5) and section
7A—
(a) a registered undertaking shall not make
an offer to effect a health insurancecontract of a particular type —
(i) unless the offer is maintained —
(I) for a period of not less than 31
consecutive days commencingon the day on which the offeris first made, and
(II) throughout that period on the
same terms and conditions onwhich the offer is first made,
and
(ii) unless the offer is to effect that con-
tract for a period of 12 consecutivemonths except that the offer maybe to effect the contract for ashorter or longer period if, andonly if —
(I) in all the circumstances of the
case, there is good andsufficient reason for doingso, and
(II) the entering into of the con-
tract by the undertaking doesnot in any way prejudice theachievement of the principalobjective specified in section1A(1),
and
(b) the net premium payable for each
insured person under any healthinsurance contract effected by a part-icular registered undertaking shall bethe same as that payable under every
1OJC 297, 29.11.2005, p.4
7Pt.2 S.6Pt.2 S.6
8[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
other such contract (after due allow-
ance has been made in respect of thepayment of any net premium byinstalments) that —
(i) is effected by that undertaking,
(ii) is in respect of the same period as
that to which the first-mentionedcontract relates,
(iii) relates to the same health services
as those to which the first-men-tioned contract relates, and
(iv) provides for the same payments by
the undertaking in respect ofthose services as those providedfor by the first-mentionedcontract.
(2) A registered undertaking shall not contra-
vene subsection (1) .
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-
section (1), net premiums payable under healthinsurance contracts shall not be varied by refer-ence to —
(a) the age, sex or sexual orientation or the
suffering or prospective suffering of aperson from a chronic disease, illnessor other medical condition or from adisease, illness or medical condition ofa particular kind,
(b) the frequency of the provision of health
services to a person, or
(c) the amounts of payments or the number
of different payments to which a per-son becomes entitled under such acontract.
(4) Subject to subsection (6), the amounts of
the payments provided by a health insurance con-tract in respect of the health services to which itrelates shall not be varied by reference to the age,sex or sexual orientation of the person to whomthose services are provided.
(5) Notwithstanding subsections (1) to (3), a
net premium payable under a health insurancecontract effected by a registered undertaking —
(a) shall, in so far as it relates to a person
under the age of 18 years, be —
(i) waived, or
(ii) reduced, such a net premium being
not more than 50 per cent of the[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
net premium in respect of a per-
son other than the persons speci-fied in this subsection under ahealth insurance contract effectedby that undertaking,
and
(b) may be reduced in so far as it relates —
(i) to a person who is of or over the
age of 18 years and under the ageof 23 years, is receiving fulltimeeducation and is dependent on theperson with whom the contract iseffected, such a net premiumbeing not more than 50 per centof the net premium in respect of aperson other than the personsspecified in this subsection undera health insurance contracteffected by that undertaking,
(ii) to a person who is a member of a
restricted membership under-taking and is in receipt of a pen-sion recognised for the purposesof the undertaking, or
(iii) to a person who is a member, for
the purposes of health insurance,of a group of persons, such a netpremium being, if it is reduced,not less than 90 per cent of the netpremium in respect of a personother than the persons specified inthis subsection under a healthinsurance contract effected bythat undertaking.
(6) Where any person named in a health
insurance contract effected by a registeredundertaking —
(a) is the spouse, a child or a dependent of
a party to the contract, or
(b) is the spouse, a child or a dependent of
another person named in the contract,
then the undertaking may aggregate or combine,
as it thinks fit, claims in respect of health services,other than in-patient services, for the purposes ofcalculating payments, other than in-patient indem-nity payments, to be made by it pursuant to thecontract. ”.
7.—Section 7A of the Act of 1994 is amended —
(a) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (1):
9Pt.2 S.6
Amendment of
section 7A of Actof 1994.Pt.2 S.7
10[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
“(1) In this section, ‘insured person ’means any person,
other than the registered undertaking, who —
(a) is party to or named in the health insurance con-
tract concerned (other than a health insurancecontract of a type referred to in section10(3)), and
(b) is of or over the age of 30 years. ”,
(b) by substituting the following subsections for subsection
(2):
“(2) Notwithstanding section 7 but subject to subsec-
tion (2A), a registered undertaking may require, onaccount of any of the circumstances referred to in para-graph ( a), (b), (c), (cc)o r( d) of subsection (4), the pay-
ment under a health insurance contract of a net premiumthe amount of which is greater than that of the net pre-mium (in this section referred to as the ‘unadjusted net
premium ’) which could have been required to be paid if
this section had not been enacted.
(2A) A registered undertaking shall ensure that any
requirement it has made under subsection (2) is not with-drawn and otherwise continues to have effect. ”,
(c) in subsection (4) —
(i) in paragraph ( c), by substituting “13 weeks ”for“12
months ”, and
(ii) by inserting the following paragraph after paragraph
(c):
“(cc) in the period of the 13 weeks preceding the
date on which the registered undertakingconcerned was requested to effect thehealth insurance contract, a healthinsurance contract was in force in respectof which the insured person was a party toor named in the contract and in respect ofwhom any registered undertaking provid-ing that contract could have required thepayment of a net premium that wasgreater than the unadjusted premium, ”,
(d) in subsection (5) —
(i) by substituting “net premium ”for“premium ”, and
(ii) by substituting “unadjusted net premium ”for“unad-
justed premium ”,
(e) in subsection (6), in paragraph ( b), by substituting “unad-
justed net premium ”for“unadjusted premium ”, and
(f) in subsection (7), in paragraph ( a), by substituting “unad-
justed net premium ”for“unadjusted premium ”.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
8.—The Act of 1994 is amended by inserting the following sections
after section 7A:
“Submission of
new type ofhealthinsurancecontract andfurnishing ofcertain othertypes of healthinsurancecontract toAuthority.7AB. —(1) Where a registered undertaking
proposes, on or after the commencement ofsection 8 of the Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 , to offer in the State a new
type of health insurance contract (and regardlessof whether the contract is already offered outsidethe State by the undertaking or any other person),it shall, not later than 10 working days before firstmaking any such offer, submit a sample of the con-tract to the Authority.
(2) A registered undertaking shall, not later
than 3 months after the commencement of section
8of the Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 , furnish to the Authority a
sample of every type of health insurance contractthat either —
(a) is on offer by it in the State on that com-
mencement, or
(b) is no longer on offer by it in the State
but in respect of which one or morethan one health insurance contract ofsuch type —
(i) has been effected by it before that
commencement, and
(ii) is in force on that commencement.
(3) The reference in subsection (1) to a new
type of health insurance contract includes a healthinsurance contract which has been altered in anymaterial particular subsequent to the submissionof a sample of the contract to the Authority pursu-ant to that subsection.
Register of
HealthInsuranceContracts.7AC. —(1) The Authority shall, as soon as may
be after the commencement of section 8 of the
Health Insurance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 , establish and maintain a register to be
known as The Register of Health InsuranceContracts.
(2) The Register of Health Insurance Contracts
shall be in such form and shall contain such part-iculars relating to any type of health insurancecontract on offer in the State on or after the estab-lishment of the Register as may be specified bythe Authority.
(3) The Authority shall ensure that the con-
tents of The Register of Health Insurance Con-tracts are available for inspection by members ofthe public free of charge at the office of the Auth-ority during normal working hours.
11Pt.2
Amendment of Act
of 1994.Pt.2 S.8
Further amendment
of Act of 1994.
12[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(4) The Authority may make the contents of
The Register of Health Insurance Contracts avail-able for inspection by members of the public freeof charge on the Authority ’s website. ”.
9.—The Act of 1994 is amended by inserting the following sections
after section 7B:
“Registered
insurers shallmake allreasonableefforts toobtain certaininformation inrespect ofinsuredpersons, etc.7C.—(1) A registered undertaking shall, in
respect of each health insurance contract that pro-vides for the making of in-patient indemnity pay-ments and that is effected by it on or after 1January 2009, make all reasonable efforts toobtain the relevant information in respect of eachinsured person.
(2) A registered undertaking may, for the pur-
poses of obtaining, in respect of a health insurancecontract referred to in subsection (1), the relevantinformation in respect of each insured person,request in writing the policy holder to furnish theundertaking with the relevant information inrespect of each insured person not later than 30days from the date of receipt of the request.
(3) A request under subsection (2) shall be
accompanied by a copy of this section.
(4) The policy holder, the subject of a request
under subsection (2), shall comply with thatrequest.
(5) A registered undertaking which has
obtained relevant information for the purposes of
subsection (1) shall not make use of, or disclose,the relevant information except —
(a) for the purposes of making a claim
referred to in section 470(3)( b)(ii) or
470B(6)( b)(ii) of the Taxes Consoli-
dation Act 1997, or
(b) for the purposes of complying with
section 125A of the Stamp Duties Con-solidation Act 1999.
(6) In this section, ‘relevant information ’,i n
relation to an insured person, means —
(a) the name of the person,
(b) the sex of the person,
(c) the date of birth of the person, and
(d) the Personal Public Service Number
(within the meaning of section 262 ofthe Social Welfare Consolidation Act2005) of the person.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Obligation to
makeinformationreturns toAuthority.7D.—(1) A registered undertaking or former
registered undertaking to which this subsectionapplies by virtue of subsection (4) shall, not laterthan 30 days (or such longer period as the Auth-ority may permit in its discretion) after the expir-ation of each period of 6 months, the first such 6months period commencing on 1 January 2009,make an information return to the Authority —
(a) in such form as may be prescribed, and
(b) subject to subsections (2) and (5), con-
taining such information concerningthe undertaking ’s health insurance
business or former health insurancebusiness, as the case may be, duringthe period of 6 months concerned (inthis Part referred to as the ‘relevant
period ’) as may be prescribed.
(2) Subject to subsection (5), the information
referred to in subsection (1) which may be pre-scribed includes —
(a) the total number of persons insured, or
a class thereof, with the registeredundertaking or former registeredundertaking concerned during the rel-evant period,
(b) the total number of persons insured, or
a class thereof, in each age group andthe gender profile of each age group inrespect of the relevant period,
(c) the total number of persons in each age
group, or a class thereof, effectinghealth insurance contracts during therelevant period,
(d) the in-patient indemnity payments, or a
class thereof, made by the registeredundertaking or former registeredundertaking concerned during the rel-evant period,
(e) information relating to the health
insurance services provided during therelevant period, and
(f) such other information relating to the
relevant period, other than personaldata, which may reasonably be con-sidered to be information which willenable or assist the Minister or theAuthority to perform their respectivefunctions under this Act.
(3) The information concerning a registered
undertaking ’s or former registered undertaking ’s
health insurance business or former health
13Pt.2 S.9Pt.2 S.9
14[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
insurance business, as the case may be, to be con-
tained in an information return may include infor-mation that came into existence before the enact-ment of this section.
(4) Subsection (1) applies to each undertaking
that was a registered undertaking, but not arestricted membership undertaking, for all, or anypart of, the period of 6 months concerned.
(5) The references in subsection (1) to health
insurance business and former health insurancebusiness shall not include so much of any suchbusiness which is comprised of health insurancecontracts to which the relevant financial provisionsdo not apply, and the references to information inthat subsection and subsection (2) shall be con-strued accordingly.
Evaluation and
analysis ofinformationreturns, etc.7E.—(1) The Authority shall, for the purposes
of enabling the Minister to perform his or herfunctions under this Act or of enabling or assistingit to perform its functions under this Act —
(a) evaluate and analyse all information
returns made to it and, without limitingthe generality of the foregoing, having
particular regard to —
(i) the average insurance claim pay-
ment per insured person made bythe relevant market sector duringthe relevant periods for each agegroup to which the returns relatein respect of the total number ofpersons insured in that age group,or a class thereof, during the rel-evant periods,
(ii) the average insurance claim pay-
ment per insured person made bythe relevant market sector duringthe relevant periods in respect ofthe total number of personsinsured, or a class thereof, duringthe relevant periods,
(iii) the age groups for which the aver-
age insurance claim paymentreferred to in subparagraph (i) isin excess of the average insuranceclaim payment referred to in sub-paragraph (ii) in respect of thesame relevant periods,
(iv) in the case of age groups which fall
within subparagraph (iii), theextent of the excess referred to inthat subparagraph attributable toeach such age group, and[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(v) the net financial impact on each
registered undertaking or formerregistered undertaking of the rel-evant financial provisions duringthe relevant periods,
and
(b) as soon as may be after the end of each
6 months period, 12 months period, orlonger period, as specified by the Mini-ster by notice in writing given to theAuthority (in this paragraph referredto as the ‘specified period ’), prepare
and furnish to the Minister a report inrelation to —
(i) such evaluation and analysis in
respect of the information returnswhich relate to the specifiedperiod,
(ii) such matters concerning the carry-
ing on of health insurance busi-ness and developments in relationto health insurance generally thatthe Authority considers ought tobe brought to the attention of theMinister (including information inrelation to the profitability of anyregistered undertaking or formerregistered undertaking where theoperation of the relevant financialprovisions is expected to result ina positive cumulative net financialimpact on the undertaking),
(iii) the amounts of the age-related tax
credits that the Authority con-siders, after having regard to suchevaluation and analysis, wouldneed to be afforded, under section470B(4) of the Taxes Consoli-dation Act 1997, to personsinsured by registered undertakings(other than restricted membershipundertakings) having regard tothe principal objective specified insection 1A(1) (in so far as thatobjective relates to healthinsurance contracts that providefor in-patient indemnitypayments) and to achieving theaim of avoiding overcompensationbeing made to a registered under-taking or former registered under-taking under the operation of therelevant financial provisions, and
(iv) if the amounts referred to in subpa-
ragraph (iii) were given effect bya statutory provision, the amount
15Pt.2 S.9Pt.2 S.9
16[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
of the stamp duty that the Auth-
ority considers would need to bepaid, pursuant to section 125A ofthe Stamp Duties ConsolidationAct 1999, by registered under-takings (other than restrictedmembership undertakings) inrespect of the persons insured bythem in order to meet the cost tothe Exchequer of the total of theamounts referred to in subpara-graph (iii).
(2) The Minister shall, after having regard to —
(a) the principal objective specified in
section 1A(1),
(b) the need to facilitate competition
between registered undertakings, and
(c) any report furnished to him or her pur-
suant to subsection (1)( b),
make recommendations to the Minister for Fin-
ance relating to section 470B of the Taxes Consoli-dation Act 1997 or section 125A of the StampDuties Consolidation Act 1999.
(3) The Minister may engage a person whom
he or she considers to be competent and qualifiedto do so to advise him or her and to consult withhim or her in relation to the functions of the Mini-ster under this section.
Overcompen-
satedundertakingrequired tomake paymentto Exchequerif it has mademore thanreasonableprofit.7F.—(1) A registered undertaking or former
registered undertaking shall, in respect of eachyear —
(a) maintain and furnish to the Authority
(before 1 April of the next succeedingyear), in such form as may be specifiedby the Authority, a statement of profitand loss in respect of —
(i) its health insurance business in the
State which falls within paragraph(b) of section 7D(1), and
(ii) such other health insurance
services, provided by the under-taking, as may be prescribed,
(b) maintain and furnish to the Authority
(before 1 April of the next succeedingyear), in such form as may be specifiedby the Authority, a balance sheet inrespect of —
(i) its health insurance business in the
State which falls within paragraph(b) of section 7D(1), and[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(ii) such other health insurance
services, provided by the under-taking, as may be prescribed,
and
(c) furnish to the Authority (before 1 April
of the next succeeding year), suchother information relating to the yearas may be prescribed and, withoutlimiting the generality of the foregoing,such information may include a state-ment of profit and loss and a balancesheet in respect of its health insurancebusiness as it relates to those personsreceiving age-related tax credits.
(2) ( a) A statement of profit and loss or
balance sheet shall, prior to its beingfurnished to the Authority pursuant tosubsection (1), be certified by an inde-pendent accountant in such form asmay be specified by the Authority.
(b) The Minister may prescribe the bases
for the calculation of costs, premia andother relevant financial data that are tobe included in a statement of profitand loss or balance sheet to be fur-nished to the Authority pursuant tosubsection (1).
(3) A registered undertaking or former regis-
tered undertaking which has furnished the Auth-ority with information under subsection (1) shallprovide the Authority with such assistance as isreasonably necessary for the due performance ofthe Authority ’s functions under this section in
relation to such information.
(4) The Authority shall, as soon as may be after
the expiration of each year commencing from andincluding 2009, determine what would constitute areasonable profit for a registered undertaking inrespect of its health insurance business in respectof the period from 1 January 2009 to the end ofthe year concerned.
(5) The Authority shall —
(a) evaluate and analyse the information
furnished to it under subsection (1) bya registered undertaking or formerregistered undertaking, and
(b) as soon as may be, make a determi-
nation as to whether or not the cumu-lative net financial impact of the rel-evant financial provisions on aregistered undertaking or former regis-tered undertaking is positive for theperiod from 1 January 2009 to the end
17Pt.2 S.9Pt.2 S.9
18[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
of the year to which the information
relates and, if so, the amount by whichthe cumulative net financial impact ispositive.
(6) ( a) Where the Authority determines under
subsection (5)( b) that there is a posi-
tive cumulative net financial impact ona registered undertaking or formerregistered undertaking in respect of aperiod, it shall make a determinationas to whether the undertaking has orhas not, in respect of that period, madea profit which is in excess of thereasonable profit determined undersubsection (4) in respect of that period.
(b) Where the Authority determines under
paragraph ( a) that a registered under-
taking or former registered under-taking has made a profit which is in
excess of a reasonable profit in respectof a period, it shall make a furtherdetermination as to the monetaryequivalent amount of the profit whichis in excess of the corresponding mon-etary equivalent amount of suchreasonable profit in respect of thatperiod.
(7) Where, in respect of a period, the Authority
has determined under subsection (5)( b) that the
cumulative net financial impact of the relevant fin-ancial provisions on a registered undertaking orformer registered undertaking was positive, anddetermined under subsection (6)( a) that the
undertaking has made a profit which is in excess ofthe reasonable profit determined under subsection(4), it shall prepare a report (in this Part referredto as the ‘draft report ’) setting out —
(a) the reasonable profit determined under
subsection (4),
(b) the amount determined under subsec-
tion (5)( b) to be the positive cumulat-
ive net financial impact on theundertaking,
(c) the monetary equivalent amount deter-
mined under subsection (6)( b)t ob e
the profit of the undertaking which isin excess of the corresponding monet-ary equivalent amount of such reason-able profit,
(d) the cumulative amount of overcompens-
ation, being the lower of the amountsreferred to in paragraphs ( b) and ( c),[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(e) the amount of overcompensation to be
paid to the Exchequer by the under-taking, being the cumulative amount ofovercompensation referred to in para-graph ( d) reduced by the total amount
of overcompensation paid or due to bepaid to the Exchequer pursuant to theoperation of subsection (10) in respectof all the periods prior to the first-men-tioned period, and
(f) the bases on which it made the determi-
nations, and calculated the amounts,referred to in paragraphs ( a)t o( e).
(8) ( a) The Authority shall, as soon as may be
after the preparation of the draftreport —
(i) furnish a copy of the draft report to
the registered undertaking orformer registered undertaking thesubject of the report,
(ii) invite the undertaking to make rep-
resentations to the Authority inrelation to the draft report beforethe expiration of 21 days (or suchlonger period as the Authoritymay permit in its discretion) fromthe day on which the undertakingreceived the report, and
(iii) take into account any such rep-
resentations made to it within thatperiod before preparing the finalreport as soon as is practicableafter the expiration of that periodof 21 days (or, if applicable, theexpiration of the longer periodpermitted pursuant to subpara-graph (ii)).
(b) The determinations of the Authority
contained in its final report shall befinal and conclusive (including for thepurposes of any proceedings concern-ing the recovery of an amount referredto in subsection (11)).
(c) The Authority shall furnish the final
report to the Minister as soon as maybe after it has been prepared.
(9) Where the Minister is furnished with a
report under subsection (8), the Minister shall, assoon as may be, furnish a copy of the report to theregistered undertaking or former registered under-taking the subject of the report together with acopy of this section.
19Pt.2 S.9Pt.2 S.9
20[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(10) Where a registered undertaking or former
registered undertaking is furnished with a copy ofa report under subsection (9), it shall, not laterthan 2 months from the date on which it is giventhe report, pay to the Exchequer the amount setout in the report pursuant to paragraph ( e) of sub-
section (7).
(11) The Minister on behalf of the Minister for
Finance may recover, as a simple contract debt inany court of competent jurisdiction, from theregistered undertaking or former registered under-taking by which it is payable, any amount due andowing to the Exchequer pursuant to the operationof subsection (10).
(12) Notwithstanding that the Authority may
not, in respect of a particular year, or in respectof a particular registered undertaking or formerregistered undertaking, be required under subsec-tion (8) to furnish a report to the Minister, theMinister may make a request in writing to theAuthority to be furnished, within the period speci-fied in the request (being a period reasonable inthe circumstances), with such information relatingto any determination it has made under subsection(5) or (6) in respect of a particular registeredundertaking or former registered undertaking(including information relating to the basis onwhich such determination was made) as the Mini-ster specifies in the request.
(13) The Authority shall comply with a request
made under subsection (12) by the Minister.
Disclosure of
contents ofinformationreturns.7G.—(1) The contents of information returns
shall, in so far as they can be related to individualregistered undertakings or former registeredundertakings, be disclosed only where necessaryfor the purposes of the functions of the Ministeror the Authority under this Act.
(2) Subject to subsection (1), the Authority
may, where it considers it appropriate to do so,disclose aggregate data derived from informationreturns.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the
disclosure of information by means of a report fur-nished to the Minister pursuant to section7E(1)( b) or 7F(8)(c).
Registered
undertaking toprovide certainpremiuminformation topolicy holdersor certainother persons.7H.—Where a registered undertaking effects a
health insurance contract on or after the com-mencement of section 9 of the Health Insurance
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 (including
any renewal of such a contract entered into beforethat commencement), it shall, at the same time aseffecting the contract, or as soon as is practicablethereafter, give —
(a) the policy holder, or[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(b) the person to whom the registered
undertaking issues the request for pay-ment of the premium due under thehealth insurance contract, where thatperson is not the policy holder,
a statement in writing setting out —
(i) the premium payable under the contract
in respect of each insured personbefore any deduction referred to in thedefinition of ‘net premium ’in section
2 is made from the premium, and
(ii) the net premium under the contract in
respect of each insured person. ”.
10.—Section 12A is amended by inserting the following subsection
after subsection (4):
“(5) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (1), any
information derived from the contents of returns and which hasbeen disclosed by the Minister to the Minister for Finance is,and shall be deemed always to have been, necessarily so dis-closed for the purposes of enabling or assisting —
(a) the determination of the age-related tax credit
referred to in section 470B of the Taxes Consoli-dation Act 1997, or
(b) the determination of the amount of levy referred to
in section 125A of the Stamp Duties ConsolidationAct 1999. ”.
11.—The Act of 1994 is amended by substituting the following
section for section 13:
“13.—(1) Subject to subsection (3), if the Minister considers,
after having consulted with the Authority, that it is in theinterests of policy holders or potential policy holders of a typeof health insurance contract that certain information shouldaccompany the contract, the Minister may make regulations —
(a) specifying the type of contract and the information,
(b) requiring registered undertakings which supply the
contract to ensure that the information accompaniesthe contract in the manner and form specified inthe regulations,
(c) regulating or prohibiting the supply by registered
undertakings of the contract if any regulation madeunder paragraph ( b) is not complied with in so far as
the regulation applies to the contract, and
(d) without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (a),
requiring registered undertakings to include a state-ment in their offers to renew health insurance con-tracts, or a class of such offers, as to the rights(including open enrolment rights), or a class of such
21Pt.2 S.9
Amendment of
section 12A of Actof 1994.
Regulations may
specify informationto be provided topolicy holders andpotential policyholders of type ofhealth insurancecontract, etc.Pt.2 S.11
22[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
rights, of the policy holders concerned in respect of
the contracts.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), if the Minister considers, after
having consulted with the Authority, that it is in the interests ofpolicy holders or potential policy holders of a type of healthinsurance contract that certain information should accompanyadvertisements which relate (whether in whole or in part) to thecontract, the Minister may make regulations —
(a) specifying the type of contract and the information,
and
(b) requiring registered undertakings, the advertising of
which relates (whether in whole or in part) to thecontract, to ensure that the information accompaniesthe advertisements in the manner and form specifiedin the regulations.
(3) The Minister shall not make a regulation under this
section unless the Minister is of the opinion that —
(a) the typical policy holder or potential policy holder of
the type of health insurance contract concernedwould need the information concerned in order tomake an informed contract decision, and
(b) if such information was withheld, omitted or conce-
aled, it would be likely to cause the typical policyholder or potential policy holder of such a contractto make a contract decision that the policy holder orpotential policy holder, as the case may be, wouldnot otherwise make.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude a
regulation being made under this section which applies to alltypes of health insurance contract.
(5) Regulations made under subsection (2) may be expressed
to apply to a type of advertisement specified in the regulations.
(6) In this section —
‘accompanied ’—
(a) in relation to information to accompany a health
insurance contract —
(i) includes accompanied by way of being incorpor-
ated into or stamped on the contract, and
(ii) in the case of an offer to renew the contract,
includes accompanied by way of being incorpor-ated into or stamped on the offer to renew thecontract made prior to the issue of the contractwhere such offer is accepted,
and
(b) in relation to information to accompany an advertise-
ment which relates (whether in whole or in part) to[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
a health insurance contract, includes accompanied by
way of —
(i) being incorporated into the advertisement, or
(ii) there being a reference in the advertisement to
the means by which the information may bereadily obtained;
‘advertisement ’includes any form of advertising or marketing;
‘contract decision ’, in relation to a type of health insurance con-
tract, means —
(a) a decision on whether or not to enter into a contract
of health insurance of that type, or
(b) if a contract of health insurance of that type has
already been entered into, a decision on whether ornot to —
(i) cancel the contract,
(ii) renew the contract, or
(iii) exercise a contractual right under the contract;
‘supply ’, in relation to a health insurance contract, includes fur-
nish, offer or agree to supply and expose or display for supply. ”.
12.—Section 14 of the Act of 1994 is amended —
(a) in subsection (5), by substituting “Subject to subsection
(5A), the Minister ”for“The Minister ”, and
(b) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (5):
“(5A) The Minister shall not, on or after the com-
mencement of section 12 of the Health Insurance
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 , provide by regu-
lations for the registration of any restricted membershipundertaking which was not registered before that com-mencement. ”.
13.—Section 17 of the Act of 1994 is amended by substituting the
following for subsection (1):
“(1) In this section, ‘assessable amount ’, in relation to a quar-
ter, means the gross amount received by a registered under-taking by way of premiums in that quarter in respect of thehealth insurance business of the undertaking in the State on orafter the establishment day, but excluding any amount —
(a) so received in the course of or by way of rein-
surance, or
(b) so paid in respect of a stamp duty under section 125A
of the Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999. ”.
23Pt.2 S.11
Amendment of
section 14 of Act of1994.
Amendment of
section 17 of Act of1994.Pt.2
Enforcement
notices.
24[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
14.—The Act of 1994 is amended by inserting the following Part
after Part III:
“PART IIIA
Enforcement Notices
Interpretation
of Part IIIA.18A. —In this Part —
‘enforcement notice ’means a notice under
section 18B(1);
‘relevant provision ’means —
(a) a provision of this Act, or
(b) a provision of a regulation under this
Act.
Issue of
enforcementnotices.18B. —(1) Without prejudice to the generality
of sections 4 and 15, where the Authority is of theopinion that a person —
(a) is contravening a relevant provision, or
(b) has contravened a relevant provision in
circumstances that make it likely thatthe contravention will continue or berepeated,
then the Authority may serve on the person a
notice in writing, accompanied by a copy of thisPart—
(i) stating that it is of that opinion,
(ii) specifying the relevant provision as to
which it is of that opinion and thereasons why it is of that opinion,
(iii) directing the person to take such steps
as are specified in the notice to remedythe contravention or, as the case maybe, the matters occasioning it, and
(iv) specifying a period (ending not earlier
than the period specified in section18C(1) within which an applicationunder that section against any direc-tion specified in the notice may bemade) within which those steps mustbe taken, being a period reasonable inthe circumstances.
(2) The steps specified in an enforcement
notice to remedy any contravention or matter towhich the notice relates may be framed so as toafford the person on whom it is served a choicebetween different ways of remedying the contra-vention or matter, as the case may be.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(3) Where a person on whom an enforcement
notice has been served makes an application undersection 18C(1) against any direction specified inthe notice, the steps specified in the notice neednot be taken by the person pending the determi-nation, withdrawal or abandonment of theapplication.
(4) The Authority may cancel an enforcement
notice by notice in writing served on the personconcerned.
(5) Where a person fails to take the steps speci-
fied in an enforcement notice served on the per-son, the Authority may, on notice to that person,apply in a summary manner to the High Court foran order requiring the person to take those steps(or to take such varied or other steps for the likepurpose as may be specified in the order), andthe Court —
(a) may —
(i) make the order sought,
(ii) make the order sought subject to
such variations to those steps asmay be specified in the order, or
(iii) make the order sought subject to
such other steps for the like pur-pose as may be specified in theorder,
or
(b) may dismiss the application,
and, whether paragraph ( a)o r( b) is applicable,
may make such order as to costs as it thinks fit inrespect of the application.
Application
forcancellation ofdirectionspecified inenforcementnotice.18C. —(1) A person on whom an enforcement
notice has been served may, on notice to the Auth-ority, not later than 45 days after being so served,apply to the High Court for the cancellation of anydirection specified in the notice and, on such anapplication, the Court may —
(a) cancel the direction,
(b) confirm the direction, or
(c) vary the direction,
and, whether paragraph ( a), (b)o r( c) is applic-
able, make such order as to costs as it thinks fit inrespect of the application.
(2) The decision of the High Court under this
section on a direction specified in an enforcementnotice shall be final save that, by leave of that
25Pt.2 S.14Pt.2 S.14
Amendment of
section 20 of Act of1994.
Amendment of
section 21 of Act of1994.
Amendment of
Schedule to Act of1994.[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Court or of the Supreme Court, an appeal by the
Authority or the person concerned, as the casemay be, from the decision shall lie to the SupremeCourt on a question of law.
Rules of
Court.18D. —Rules of Court may make provision for
the expedition of the hearing of proceedings underthis Part. ”.
15.—Section 20(2) of the Act of 1994 is amended by deleting “the
Schedule ”and substituting “Schedule 1 ”.
16.—Section 21 of the Act of 1994 is amended by substituting the
following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) In addition to the functions conferred on the Authority
by sections 7AC, 7D, 7E, 7F, 7G, 12, 14, 15, 17 and 18 and PartIIIA, the principal functions of the Authority shall be —
(a) to manage and administer any schemes prescribed
under section 12, and to establish and maintain thefund referred to in that section,
(b) to maintain The Register of Health Benefits Under-
taking and The Register of Health InsuranceContracts,
(c) to evaluate and analyse information and other returns
made to it,
(d) to take such action as it considers appropriate to
increase the awareness of members of the public oftheir rights as consumers of health insurance and ofthe health insurance services available to them,
(e) to advise the Minister either at his or her request or
on its own initiative on matters relating to the func-tions of the Minister under this Act, the functions ofthe Authority under this Act and health insurancegenerally,
(f) without prejudice to the generality of paragraph ( e),
to advise the Minister either at his or her request oron its own initiative as to whether, in the opinionof the Authority, the principal objective specified insection 1A(1) is being achieved to the appropriateextent, and
(g) to monitor the operation of this Act and the carrying
on of health insurance business and developments inrelation to health insurance generally. ”.
17.—The Schedule to the Act of 1994 is amended by deleting
“SCHEDULE ”and substituting “SCHEDULE 1 ”.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
18.—The Act of 1994 is amended by inserting the following new
Schedule after the Schedule:
“Section 6A(2).
SCHEDULE 2
COMMUNITY FRAMEWORK FOR STATE
AID IN THE FORM OF PUBLIC SERVICE
COMPENSATION
(2005/C 297/04)
1.PURPOSE AND SCOPE
1. It is apparent from the case-law of the Court
of Justice of the European Communities ( 1), that
public service compensation does not constituteState aid within the meaning of Article 87(1) ofthe EC Treaty if it fulfils certain conditions.However, if public service compensation does notmeet these conditions and if the general criteriafor the applicability of Article 87(1) are satisfied,such compensation constitutes State aid.
2. Commission Decision 2005/842/EC of 28
November 2005 on the application of Article 86(2)of the EC Treaty to State aid in the form of publicservice compensation granted to certain under-takings entrusted with the operation of services ofgeneral economic interest ( 2) lays down the con-
ditions under which certain types of public servicecompensation constitute State aid compatible withArticle 86(2) of the EC Treaty and exempts com-pensation satisfying those conditions from theprior notification requirement. Public service com-pensation which constitutes State aid and does notfall within the scope of Decision 2005/842/EC on
the application of Article 86(2) of the EC Treaty toState aid in the form of public service compensationgranted to certain undertakings entrusted with theoperation of services of general economic interestwill still be subject to the prior notificationrequirement. The purpose of this framework is tospell out the conditions under which such State aidcan be found compatible with the common marketpursuant to Article 86(2).
3. This framework is applicable to public service
compensation granted to undertakings in con-nexion with activities subject to the rules of theEC Treaty, with the exception of the transport sec-tor, and the public service broadcasting sectorcovered by the Communication from the Com-mission on the application of State aid rules topublic service broadcasting ( 3).
4. The provisions of this framework apply without
prejudice to the stricter specific provisions relatingto public service obligations contained in sectoralCommunity legislation and measures.
27Pt.2
Insertion of
Schedule 2 into Actof 1994.Pt.2 S.18
28[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
5. This framework applies without prejudice to the
Community provisions in force in the field ofpublic procurement and competition (in particularArticles 81 and 82 of the EC Treaty).
(1) Judgments in Case C-280/00 Altmark Trans
GmbH and Regierungspra ¨sidium Magdeburg v
Nahverkehrsgesellschaft Altmark GmbH(‘Altmark ’)[2003] ECR I-7747 and Joined Cases
C-34/01 to C-38/01 Enirisorse SpA v Ministero
delle Finanze [2003] ECR I-14243.
(2) OJ L 312, 29.11.2005, p. 67.
(3) OJ C 320, 15.11.2001, p. 5.
2.CONDITIONS GOVERNING THE COM-
PATIBILITY OF PUBLIC SERVICE COM-PENSATION THAT CONSTITUTES STATEAID
2.1.General provisions
6. In its judgment in Altmark , the Court laid down
the conditions under which public service compen-sation does not constitute State aid as follows:
‘[. . .] First, the recipient undertaking must actually
have public service obligations to discharge, andthe obligations must be clearly defined. [. . .].
[. . .] Second, the parameters on the basis of which
the compensation is calculated must be establishedin advance in an objective and transparent man-ner, to avoid it conferring an economic advantagewhich may favour the recipient undertaking overcompeting undertakings. [. . .] Payment by aMember State of compensation for the lossincurred by an undertaking without the par-ameters of such compensation having been estab-lished beforehand, where it turns out after theevent that the operation of certain services in con-nection with the discharge of public service obli-gations was not economically viable, thereforeconstitutes a financial measure which falls withinthe concept of State aid within the meaning ofArticle 87(1) of the Treaty.
[. . .] Third, the compensation cannot exceed what
is necessary to cover all or part of the costsincurred in the discharge of public service obli-gations, taking into account the relevant receiptsand a reasonable profit [. . .].
[. . .] Fourth, where the undertaking which is to dis-
charge public service obligations, in a specific case,is not chosen pursuant to a public procurementprocedure which would allow for the selection ofthe tenderer capable of providing those servicesat the least cost to the community, the level ofcompensation needed must be determined on thebasis of an analysis of the costs which a typical[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
undertaking, well run and adequately provided
with means of transport so as to be able to meetthe necessary public service requirements, wouldhave incurred in discharging those obligations,taking into account the relevant receipts and areasonable profit for discharging the obligations. ’
7. Where these four criteria are met, public service
compensation does not constitute State aid, andArticles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty do not apply.If the Member States do not respect these criteriaand if the general criteria for the applicability ofArticle 87(1) of the EC Treaty are met, publicservice compensation constitutes State aid.
8. The Commission considers that at the current
stage of development of the common market, suchState aid may be declared compatible with theTreaty under Article 86(2) of the EC Treaty if itis necessary to the operation of the services ofgeneral economic interest and does not affect thedevelopment of trade to such an extent as wouldbe contrary to the interests of the Community.The following conditions should be met in orderto achieve such balance.
2.2.Genuine service of general economic interest
within the meaning of Article 86 of the EC Treaty
9. It is apparent from the case-law of the Court of
Justice that with the exception of the sectors inwhich there are Community rules governing thematter, Member States have a wide margin ofdiscretion regarding the nature of services thatcould be classified as being services of generaleconomic interest. Thus, the Commission ’s task is
to ensure that this margin of discretion is appliedwithout manifest error as regards the definition ofservices of general economic interest.
10. It transpires from Article 86(2) that under-
takings ( 1) entrusted with the operation of services
of general economic interest are undertakingsentrusted with ‘a particular task ’. When defining
public service obligations and in assessing whetherthose obligations are met by the undertakings con-cerned, the Member States are encouraged to con-sult widely, with a particular emphasis on users.
2.3. Need for an instrument specifying the public
service obligations and the methods of calculatingcompensation
11. The concept of service of general economic
interest within the meaning of Article 86 of theEC Treaty means that the undertakings in ques-tion have been entrusted with a special task by theState ( 2). Public authorities remain responsible —
with the exception of the sectors in which thereare Community rules governing the matter —for
setting the framework of criteria and conditionsfor the provision of services, regardless of the legal
29Pt.2 S.18Pt.2 S.18
30[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
status of the provider and of whether the service
is provided on the basis of free competition.Accordingly, a public service assignment is neces-sary in order to define the obligations of theundertakings in question and of the State. Theterm ‘State ’covers the central, regional and local
authorities.
12. Responsibility for operation of the service of
general economic interest must be entrusted to theundertaking concerned by way of one or moreofficial acts, the form of which may be determinedby each Member State. The act or acts must spec-ify, in particular:
(a) the precise nature and the duration of the
public service obligations;
(b) the undertakings and territory concerned;(c) the nature of any exclusive or special rights
assigned to the undertaking;
(d) the parameters for calculating, controlling and
reviewing the compensation;
(e) the arrangements for avoiding and repaying
any overcompensation.
13. When defining public service obligations and
in assessing whether those obligations are met bythe undertakings concerned, Member States areinvited to consult widely, with particular emphasison users.
2.4.Amount of compensation
14. The amount of compensation may not exceed
what is necessary to cover the costs incurred indischarging the public service obligations, takinginto account the relevant receipts and reasonableprofit for discharging those obligations. Theamount of compensation includes all the advan-tages granted by the State or through Stateresources in any form whatsoever. The reasonableprofit may include all or some of the productivitygains achieved by the undertakings concerned dur-ing an agreed limited period without reducing thelevel of quality of the services entrusted to theundertaking by the State.
15. In any event, compensation must be actually
used for the operation of the service of generaleconomic interest concerned. Public service com-pensation granted for the operation of a serviceof general economic interest, but actually used tooperate on other markets is not justified, andconsequently constitutes incompatible State aid.The undertaking receiving public service compen-sation may, however, enjoy a reasonable profit.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
16. The costs to be taken into consideration
include all the costs incurred in the operation ofthe service of general economic interest. Wherethe activities of the undertaking in question areconfined to the service of general economicinterest, all its costs may be taken into consider-ation. Where the undertaking also carries outactivities falling outside the scope of the service ofgeneral economic interest, only the costs associ-ated with the service of general economic interestmay be taken into consideration. The costs allo-cated to the service of general economic interestmay cover all the variable costs incurred in provid-ing the service of general economic interest, anappropriate contribution to fixed costs common toboth the service of general economic interest andother activities and an adequate return on the owncapital assigned to the service of general economicinterest ( 3). The costs linked with investments,
notably concerning infrastructure, may be takeninto account when necessary for the functioning ofthe service of general economic interest. The costslinked to any activities outside the scope of theservice of general economic interest must cover allthe variable costs, an appropriate contribution tofixed common costs and an adequate return oncapital. These costs may, under no circumstances,be imputed to the service of general economicinterest. The calculation of costs must followcriteria which have previously been defined andbe based on generally accepted cost accountingprinciples which must be brought to the know-ledge of the Commission in the context of the noti-fication pursuant to Article 88(3) of the ECTreaty.
17. The revenue to be taken into account must
include at least the entire revenue earned from theservice of general economic interest. If the under-taking in question holds special or exclusive rightslinked to a service of general economic interestthat generates profit in excess of the reasonableprofit, or benefits from other advantages grantedby the State, these must be taken into consider-ation, irrespective of their classification for thepurposes of Article 87 of the EC Treaty, and areadded to its revenue. The Member State may alsodecide that the profits accruing from other activi-ties outside the scope of the service of generaleconomic interest must be allocated in whole orin part to the financing of the service of generaleconomic interest.
18.‘Reasonable profit ’should be taken to mean a
rate of return on own capital that takes account ofthe risk, or absence of risk, incurred by the under-taking by virtue of the intervention by theMember State, particularly if the latter grantsexclusive or special rights. This rate must normallynot exceed the average rate for the sector con-cerned in recent years. In sectors where there isno undertaking comparable to the undertaking
31Pt.2 S.18Pt.2 S.18
32[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
entrusted with the operation of the service of
general economic interest, a comparison may bemade with undertakings situated in other MemberStates, or if necessary, in other sectors, providedthat the particular characteristics of each sectorare taken into account. In determining whatamounts to a reasonable profit, the Member Statemay introduce incentive criteria relating, amongother things, to the quality of service provided andgains in productive efficiency.
19. When a company carries out activities falling
both inside and outside the scope of the serviceof general economic interest, the internal accountsmust show separately the costs and receipts associ-ated with the service of general economic interestand those associated with other services, as well asthe parameters for allocating costs and revenues.Where an undertaking is entrusted with the oper-ation of several services of general economicinterest either because the authority assigning theservice of general economic interest is different orbecause the nature of the service of general econ-omic interest is different, the undertaking ’s
internal accounts must make it possible to ensurethat there is no over-compensation at the level ofeach service of general economic interest. Theseprinciples are without prejudice to the provisionsof Directive 80/723/EEC in cases where thatDirective applies.
(1)‘Undertaking ’is to be understood as any entity
engaged in an economic activity, regardless of thelegal status of the entity and the way in which it isfinanced. ‘Public undertaking ’is to be understood
as any undertaking over which the public auth-orities may exercise directly or indirectly a domi-nant influence by virtue of their ownership of it,their financial participation therein, or the ruleswhich govern it, as defined in Article 2(1)(b) ofCommission Directive 80/723/EEC of 25 June1980 on the transparency of financial relationsbetween Member States and public undertakingsas well as on financial transparency within certainundertakings (OJ L 195, 29.7.1980, p. 35. Directiveas last amended by Directive 2000/52/EC, OJ L193, 29.7.2000, p. 75).
(2) See, in particular, the judgment in Case C-
127/73 BRT v SABAM [1974] ECR-313
(3) See Joined Cases C-83/01P, C-93/01P and C-
94/01P Chronopost SA [2003] EC R I - 6993
3.OVER-COMPENSATION
20. Member States must check regularly, or
arrange for checks to be made, to ensure thatthere has been no over-compensation. Since over-compensation is not necessary for the operation ofthe service of general economic interest, it consti-tutes incompatible State aid that must be repaid[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
to the State, and for the future, the parameters for
the calculation of the compensation must beupdated.
21. Where the amount of over-compensation does
not exceed 10% of the amount of annual compen-sation, such over-compensation may be carriedforward to the next year. Some services of generaleconomic interest may have costs that vary signifi-cantly each year, notably as regards specific invest-ments. In such cases, exceptionally, over-compen-sation in excess of 10% in certain years may provenecessary for the operation of the service ofgeneral economic interest. The specific situationwhich may justify over-compensation in excess of10% should be explained in the notification to theCommission. However, the situation should bereviewed at intervals determined on the basis ofthe situation in each sector which, in any event,should not exceed four years. All over-compen-sation discovered at the end of that period shouldbe repaid.
22. Any over-compensation may be used to fin-
ance another service of general economic interestoperated by the same undertaking, but such atransfer must be shown in the undertaking ’s
accounts and be carried out in accordance with therules and principles set out in this framework,notably as regards prior notification. The MemberStates must ensure that such transfers are sub-jected to proper control. The transparency ruleslaid down in Directive 80/723/EEC apply.
23. The amount of over-compensation cannot
remain available to an undertaking on the groundthat it would rank as aid compatible with theTreaty (for example, environmental aid, employ-ment aid and aid for small and medium-sizedenterprises). If a Member State wishes to grantsuch aid, the prior notification procedure laiddown in Article 88(3) of the EC Treaty should becomplied with. Aid may be disbursed only if it hasbeen authorised by the Commission. If such aid iscompatible with a block exemption Regulation,the conditions of the relevant block exemptionRegulation must be fulfilled.
4. CONDITIONS AND OBLIGATIONS
ATTACHED TO COMMISSION DECISIONS
24. According to Article 7(4) of Council Regu-
lation (EC) No. 659/1999 of 22 March 1999 layingdown detailed rules for the application of Article93 of the EC Treaty ( 1), the Commission may
attach to a positive decision conditions subject towhich an aid may be considered compatible withthe common market, and lay down obligations toenable compliance with the decision to be moni-tored. In the field of services of general economicinterest, conditions and obligations may be neces-sary notably to ensure that aid granted to the
33Pt.2 S.18Pt.2 S.18
34[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
undertakings concerned does not actually lead to
over-compensations. In this context, periodicalreports or other obligations may be necessary, inthe light of the specific situation of each service ofgeneral economic interest.
(1) OJ L 83, 27.3.1999, p. 1. Regulation as
amended by the 2003 Act of Accession.
5.APPLICATION OF THE FRAMEWORK
25. This framework will apply for a period of six
years from the date of its publication in theOfficial Journal of the European Union . The Com-
mission may, after consulting the Member States,amend the framework before it expires, forimportant reasons linked to the development ofthe common market. Four years after the date ofpublication of this framework, the Commissionwill undertake an impact assessment based on fac-tual information and the results of wide consul-tations conducted by the Commission on the basis,notably, of data provided by the Member States.The results of the impact assessment will be madeavailable to the European Parliament, the Com-mittee of Regions and the Economic and SocialCommittee and to the Member States.
26. The Commission will apply the provisions of
this framework to all aid projects notified to it andwill take a decision on those projects after theframework is published in the Official Journal,even if the projects were notified prior to suchpublication. In the case of non-notified aid, theCommission will apply:
(a) the provisions of this framework, if the aid was
granted after publication of the framework in theOfficial Journal;
(b) the provisions in force at the time the aid was
granted, in all other cases.
6.APPROPRIATE MEASURES
27. The Commission proposes as appropriate
measures for the purposes of Article 88(1) of theEC Treaty that Member States bring their existingschemes regarding public service compensationinto line with this framework, within 18 monthsfollowing its publication in the Official Journal.Member States should confirm to the Commissionwithin one month of publication of the frameworkin the Official Journal that they agree to theappropriate measures proposed. In the absence ofany reply, the Commission will take it that theMember State concerned does not agree. ”.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
PART 3
AMENDMENT OF TAXES CONSOLIDATION ACT 1997
19.—Section 112A is amended —
(a) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) In this section —
(a) as respects so much of a payment that qualifies
for relief under section 470, ‘appropriate per-
centage ’,‘authorised insurer ’,‘relevant con-
tract ’and ‘relievable amount ’have the same
meanings, respectively, as in section 470,
(b) as respects so much of a payment that qualifies
for relief under section 470B, ‘authorised
insurer ’and ‘relevant contract ’have the same
meanings, respectively, as in section 470B,
(c)‘employee ’and‘employer ’have the same mean-
ings, respectively, as in section 983, and
(d)‘qualifying insurer ’and ‘qualifying long-term
care policy ’have the same meanings, respec-
tively, as in section 470A. ”,
(b) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (2):
“(2A) Where, for any relevant year of assessment, an
employer makes a payment of emoluments to an employeeconsisting of a perquisite in the form of a payment to anauthorised insurer under a relevant contract, and such pay-ment qualifies for relief under section 470B for that rel-evant year of assessment, section 112 shall apply as if theperquisite were increased by the amount of the age-relatedtax credit or age-related tax credits, as the case may be,that the employee is entitled to under section 470B inrespect of the payment. ”, and
(c) in subsection (3), by deleting “(within the meaning of
section 983) ”.
20.—Section 458 of the Act of 1997 is amended, in the Table to
that section, in Part 2, by inserting “section 470B ”before “section
472”.
21.—Section 470 of the Act of 1997 is amended, in subsection (1),
in the definition of “relievable amount ”—
(a) in paragraph ( a), by inserting “reduced by the amount of
credit due (if any) under section 470B(4) ”after “amount
of the payment ”, and
(b) in paragraph ( b), by inserting “reduced by the amount of
credit due (if any) under section 470B(4) ”after “refer-
able to such reimbursement or discharge ”.
35Amendment of
section 112A of Actof 1997.
Amendment of
section 458 of Actof 1997.
Amendment of
section 470 of Actof 1997.Pt.3
Age-related relief
for health insurancepremiums.
36[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
22.—The Act of 1997 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 470A:
“470B. —(1) In this section —
‘age-related tax credit ’has the same meaning as in subsection
(4);
‘authorised insurer ’means any undertaking (not being a restric-
ted membership undertaking) entered in The Register of HealthBenefits Undertakings, lawfully carrying on such business ofmedical insurance referred to in the definition of ‘relevant con-
tract ’but, in relation to an individual, also means any under-
taking (not being a restricted membership undertaking) author-ised pursuant to Council Directive No. 73/239/EEC of 24 July1973
1, Council Directive No. 88/357/EEC of 22 June 19882, and
Council Directive No. 92/49/EEC of 18 June 19923, where such
a contract was effected with the individual when the individualwas not resident in the State but was resident in anotherMember State of the European Communities;
‘employee ’and ‘employer ’have the same meanings, respec-
tively, as in section 983;
‘excluded contract of insurance ’means —
(a) a contract of insurance which comes within the mean-
ing of paragraph ( d) of the definition of ‘health
insurance contract ’in section 2(1) of the Health
Insurance Act 1994, or
(b) a contract of insurance relating solely to charges for
public hospital in-patient services made under theHealth (In-Patient Charges) Regulations 1987 (S.I.No. 116 of 1987);
‘in-patient indemnity payment ’has the same meaning as in
section 2(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1994;
‘insured person ’, in relation to a relevant contract, means an
individual, the spouse of the individual, or the children or otherdependents of the individual or of the spouse of the individual,in respect of whom the relevant contract provides specifically,whether in conjunction with other benefits or not, for the reim-bursement or discharge, in whole or in part, of actual healthexpenses (within the meaning of section 469);
‘PPS Number ’, in relation to an individual, means that individ-
ual’s Personal Public Service Number within the meaning of
section 262 of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005;
‘relevant contract ’means a contract of insurance (not being an
excluded contract of insurance) which provides for the makingof in-patient indemnity payments under the contract and which,in relation to an individual, the spouse of the individual, or thechildren or other dependents of the individual or of the spouseof the individual, provides specifically, whether in conjunctionwith other benefits or not, for the reimbursement or discharge,
1OJ No. L228 of 16 August 1973, p.3
2OJ No. L172 of 4 July 1988, p.1
3OJ No. L228 of 11 August 1992, p.1[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
in whole or in part, of actual health expenses (within the mean-
ing of section 469), being a contract of medical insurance;
‘relevant year of assessment ’means —
(a) subject to paragraph ( b), the year of assessment 2009,
2010 or 2011,
(b) where a payment made to an authorised insurer is a
monthly or other instalment towards the payment ofthe total annual premium due under a relevant con-tract, and the payment of such an instalmentbecomes due and is made in the year of assessment2012, the year of assessment 2012;
‘relievable amount ’, in relation to a payment to an authorised
insurer under a relevant contract, means —
(a) where the payment covers no benefits other than such
reimbursement or discharge as is referred to in thedefinition of ‘relevant contract ’, an amount equal to
the full amount of the payment, or
(b) where the payment covers benefits other than such
reimbursement or discharge as is referred to in thatdefinition, an amount equal to so much of the pay-ment as is referable to such reimbursement ordischarge;
‘restricted membership undertaking ’has the same meaning as in
section 2(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1994.
(2) This section applies to a payment made to an authorised
insurer under a relevant contract renewed or entered into on orafter 1 January 2009 but before 1 January 2012 where the pay-ment qualifies for relief under section 470(2).
(3) Notwithstanding section 470(4), relief due under this
section shall be given in addition to relief given under section470.
(4) Subject to subsections (5) and (6), where for a relevant
year of assessment, an individual or, if the individual is a marriedperson assessed to tax in accordance with section 1017, the indi-vidual ’s spouse, makes a payment to an authorised insurer under
a relevant contract and —
(a) the payment is in respect of a premium due under
the relevant contract and the relevant contract wasrenewed or entered into on or after 1 January 2009but before 1 January 2012, and
(b) the payment or part of the payment, as the case may
be, is attributable to an insured person, and only toan insured person, who is aged 50 years or over onthe date the relevant contract is renewed or enteredinto, as the case may be,
then the individual shall, for the relevant year of assessment, in
respect of so much of the relievable amount of the payment orpart of the payment, as the case may be, as is attributable to aninsured person referred to in paragraph ( b), be entitled to a
37Pt.3 S.22Pt.3 S.22
38[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
credit (referred to in this section as ‘age-related tax credit ’)
equal to the lower of —
(i) the amount specified in the second column of the
Table to this subsection corresponding to the classof insured person mentioned in the first column ofthat Table or, where the payment made to the auth-orised insurer is a monthly or other instalmenttowards the payment of the total annual premiumdue under the relevant contract, an amount equal tothe amount so specified divided by the total numberof instalments to be made to pay such total annualpremium, and
(ii) an amount which reduces the income tax to be
charged on the individual for the relevant year ofassessment, other than in accordance with section16(2), to nil.
TABLE
(1) (2)
Class of insured person Amount of age-related tax credit
Aged 50 years and over but less \200.00
than 60 years on the date therelevant contract is renewed orentered into, as the case may be.
Aged 60 years and over but less \500.00
than 70 years on the date therelevant contract is renewed orentered into, as the case may be.
Aged 70 years and over but less \950.00
than 80 years on the date therelevant contract is renewed orentered into, as the case may be.
Aged 80 years and over on the \1,175.00
date the relevant contract isrenewed or entered into, as thecase may be.
(5) ( a) The amount of age-related tax credit given for a rel-
evant year of assessment in respect of an insured per-son shall not exceed the amount of the paymentmade to an authorised insurer under a relevant con-tract in respect of the insured person for the relevantyear of assessment.
(b) Where an individual makes a payment to an author-
ised insurer that entitles the individual to an age-related tax credit or age-related tax credits, as thecase may be, for the year of assessment 2012, theaggregate amount of the age-related tax credit givento the individual in respect of an insured person orinsured persons, as the case may be, for that yearand the year of assessment 2011 shall not exceed theage-related tax credit or age-related tax credits, asthe case may be, that the individual would have beenentitled to if the total annual premium due under therelevant contract in respect of the insured person orinsured persons, as the case may be, had been paidin the year of assessment 2011.[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(c) Where, for any relevant year of assessment, an
employer makes a payment of emoluments to anemployee consisting of a perquisite in the form of apayment to an authorised insurer under a relevantcontract, and —
(i) the payment qualifies for relief under this section
for that relevant year of assessment, and
(ii) the aggregate of the age-related tax credit or age-
related tax credits, as the case may be, and reliefunder section 470 due in respect of the paymentexceeds the amount of the income tax charge-able, in accordance with sections 112 and 112A,in respect of the perquisite (in this paragraphreferred to as ‘the excess ’),
the excess may not reduce the income tax chargeable
on any other income of the employee for that yearof assessment or, if the employee is a married personassessed to tax in accordance with section 1017, theincome tax chargeable on any income of theemployee ’s spouse for that year of assessment.
(6) ( a) Where an individual makes a payment to an author-
ised insurer that entitles the individual to an age-related tax credit or age-related tax credits, as thecase may be, for a relevant year of assessment, theindividual shall be entitled to deduct and retain outof it—
(i) if the payment made is the total annual premium
due under the relevant contract concerned forthe relevant year of assessment, an amountequal to the total amount of the age-related taxcredit or age-related tax credits, as the casemay be,
(ii) if the payment made is a monthly or other instal-
ment towards the payment of the total annualpremium due under the relevant contract con-cerned for the relevant year of assessment, anamount equal to the total amount of the age-related tax credit or age-related tax credits, asthe case may be, to which the individual wouldbe entitled if all of that total annual premiumwere paid divided by the total number of suchinstalments to be made to pay that total annualpremium.
(b) An authorised insurer to which a payment referred to
in paragraph ( a) is made —
(i) shall accept the amount paid, after the deduction
of the age-related tax credit or age-related taxcredits, as the case may be, in discharge of theindividual ’s liability to the same extent as if the
deduction had not been made, and
39Pt.3 S.22Pt.3 S.22
40[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(ii) may, on making a claim in accordance with regu-
lations, recover from the Revenue Commis-sioners an amount equal to the amountdeducted.
(c) Where an individual makes a payment referred to in
paragraph ( a) in respect of a premium due under a
contract renewed or entered into on or after 1January 2009 but before the passing of the Health
Insurance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 , the
individual shall be deemed to have deducted andretained out of the payment an amount equal to theamount of the age-related tax credit or age-relatedtax credits, as the case may be, that the individual isentitled to under this section in respect of thatpayment.
(d) An amount that an individual is entitled to deduct and
retain out of a payment referred to in paragraph ( a)
shall be in addition to the amount that the individualis entitled to deduct and retain out of the paymentin accordance with section 470(3).
(7) ( a) The Revenue Commissioners shall make regulations
providing generally for the administration of thissection and those regulations may, in particular andwithout prejudice to the generality of the foregoing,include provision —
(i) that a claim under subsection (6)( b)(ii) by an
authorised insurer, which has registered with theRevenue Commissioners for the purposes ofmaking such a claim, shall —
(I) be made in such form and manner,
(II) be made at such time,
(III) be accompanied by such documents, and(IV) be accompanied by such information as
respects the amount of premiums paidunder relevant contracts in respect ofinsured persons aged 50 years or over in arelevant year of assessment and the numberof such individuals within each class,
as provided for in the regulations,
(ii) for the making of annual information returns by
authorised insurers, in such form (includingelectronic form) and manner as may be pro-vided for in the regulations, and containingspecified details in relation to —
(I) each individual making payments, to which
this section applies, to such insurers underrelevant contracts in a relevant year ofassessment,
(II) each insured person aged 50 years or over,
in respect of whom such payments were[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
made in the relevant year of assessment,
including —
(A) the name of the insured person,
(B) the date of birth of the insured person,
and
(C) the PPS Number of the insured person,
(III) the total amount of premiums paid by the
individual under a relevant contract inrespect of an insured person aged 50 yearsor over in a relevant year of assessment,and
(IV) the total amount deducted under subsection
(6)(a) by the individual making the pay-
ments in the relevant year of assessmentconcerned,
and
(iii) for the furnishing of any other information that
the Revenue Commissioners may reasonablyrequire for the purposes of the regulations.
(b) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid
before D áilÉireann as soon as may be after it is
made and, if a resolution annulling the regulation ispassed by D áilÉireann within the next 21 days on
which D áilÉireann has sat after the regulation is laid
before it, the regulation shall be annulled accord-ingly, but without prejudice to the validity of any-thing previously done thereunder.
(8) ( a) Where any amount is paid to an authorised insurer by
the Revenue Commissioners as an amount recover-able by virtue of subsection (6)( b) but is an amount
to which the authorised insurer is not entitled, thatamount shall be repaid by the authorised insurer.
(b) There shall be made such assessments, adjustments or
set-offs as may be required for securing repaymentof the amount referred to in paragraph ( a) and the
provisions of the Income Tax Acts relating to theassessment, collection and recovery of income taxshall, in so far as they are applicable and with neces-sary modification, apply in relation to the recoveryof such amount. ”.
23.—Section 904E of the Act of 1997 is amended —
(a) in subsection (1), by substituting the following definition
for the definition of “authorised insurer ”:
“‘authorised insurer ’—
(a) subject to paragraph ( b), has the same meaning
as in section 470,
41Pt.3 S.22
Amendment of
section 904E of Actof 1997.Pt.3 S.23
Amendment of
section 1024 of Actof 1997.
Amendment of
Schedule 29 to Actof 1997.
Levy on authorised
insurers.
42[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(b) in relation to a claim made under section 470B
(6)(b)(ii), has the same meaning as in section
470B; ”,
and
(b) in subsection (2), by inserting “or 470B(6)( b)(ii)”after
“section 470(3)( b)(ii)”.
24.—Section 1024 of the Act of 1997 is amended, in subsection
(2)(a)(vi), by inserting “, 470B ”after “sections 470, 470A ”.
25.—The Act of 1997 is amended, in Schedule 29, in column 1, by
inserting “section 470B and Regulations under that section ”before
“section 473 ”.
PART 4
AMENDMENT OF STAMP DUTIES CONSOLIDATION ACT
1999
26.—The Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999 is amended by
inserting the following section after section 125:
“125A. —(1) In this section —
‘accounting period ’means the first accounting period, the
second accounting period, the third accounting period or the
fourth accounting period;
‘authorised insurer ’means any undertaking (not being a restric-
ted membership undertaking) entered in The Register of HealthBenefits Undertakings, lawfully carrying on such business ofmedical insurance referred to in the definition of ‘relevant con-
tract ’but, in relation to an individual, also means any under-
taking (not being a restricted membership undertaking) author-ised pursuant to Council Directive No. 73/239/EEC of 24 July1973
4, Council Directive No. 88/357/EEC of 22 June 19885, and
Council Directive No. 92/49/EEC of 18 June 19926, where such
a contract was effected with the individual when the individualwas not resident in the State but was resident in anotherMember State of the European Communities;
‘due date ’, in relation to an accounting period, means —
(a) 30 September 2009 in the case of the first accounting
period,
(b) 30 September 2010 in the case of the second account-
ing period,
(c) 30 September 2011 in the case of the third accounting
period, and
4OJ No. L228 of 16 August 1973, p.3
5OJ No. L172 of 4 July 1988, p.1
6OJ No. L228 of 11 August 1992, p.1[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(d) 31 January 2012 in the case of the fourth accounting
period;
‘excluded contract of insurance ’means —
(a) a contract of insurance which comes within the mean-
ing of paragraph ( d) of the definition of ‘health
insurance contract ’in section 2(1) of the Health
Insurance Act 1994, or
(b) a contract of insurance relating solely to charges for
public hospital in-patient services made under theHealth (In-Patient Charges) Regulations 1987 (S.I.No. 116 of 1987);
‘first accounting period ’means the period of 7 months commen-
cing on 1 January 2009 and ending on 31 July 2009;
‘fourth accounting period ’means the period of 5 months com-
mencing on 1 August 2011 and ending 31 December 2011;
‘in-patient indemnity payment ’has the same meaning as in
section 2(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1994;
‘insured person ’, in relation to a relevant contract, means an
individual, the spouse of the individual, or the children or otherdependents of the individual or of the spouse of the individual,in respect of whom the relevant contract provides specifically,whether in conjunction with other benefits or not, for the reim-bursement or discharge, in whole or in part, of actual healthexpenses (within the meaning of section 469 of the Taxes Con-solidation Act 1997);
‘relevant contract ’means a contract of insurance (not being an
excluded contract of insurance) which provides for the makingof in-patient indemnity payments under the contract and which,in relation to an individual, the spouse of the individual, or thechildren or other dependents of the individual or of the spouseof the individual, provides specifically, whether in conjunctionwith other benefits or not, for the reimbursement or discharge,in whole or in part, of actual health expenses (within the mean-ing of section 469 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997), beinga contract of medical insurance;
‘restricted membership undertaking ’has the same meaning as in
section 2(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1994;
‘second accounting period ’means the period of 12 months com-
mencing on 1 August 2009 and ending on 31 July 2010;
‘third accounting period ’means the period of 12 months com-
mencing on 1 August 2010 and ending on 31 July 2011.
(2) Subject to subsections (7), (10) and (11), an authorised
insurer shall, in respect of each accounting period and not laterthan the due date, deliver to the Commissioners a statement inwriting showing the number of insured persons —
(a) aged less than 18 years —
(i) on 1 January 2009 in the case of the first account-
ing period,
43Pt.4 S.26Pt.4 S.26
44[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(ii) on 1 January 2010 in the case of the second
accounting period,
(iii) on 1 January 2011 in the case of the third
accounting period, and
(iv) on 1 August 2011 in the case of the fourth
accounting period,
and
(b) aged 18 years or over —
(i) on 1 January 2009 in the case of the first account-
ing period,
(ii) on 1 January 2010 in the case of the second
accounting period,
(iii) on 1 January 2011 in the case of the third
accounting period, and
(iv) on 1 August 2011 in the case of the fourth
accounting period,
in respect of whom a relevant contract between the authorised
insurer and the insured person, being the individual referred toin the definition of ‘insured person ’, is renewed, or entered into,
during the accounting period concerned.
(3) There shall be charged on every statement delivered by
an authorised insurer pursuant to subsection (2) a stamp duty atthe rate of —
(a)\53 in respect of each insured person aged less than
18 years, and
(b)\160 in respect of each insured person aged 18 years
or over,
included in the statement.
(4) The duty charged by subsection (3) on a statement deliv-
ered by an authorised insurer pursuant to subsection (2) shallbe paid by the authorised insurer on delivery of the statement.
(5) There shall be furnished to the Commissioners by an
authorised insurer such particulars as the Commissioners maydeem necessary in relation to any statement required by thissection to be delivered by the authorised insurer.
(6) In the case of failure by an authorised insurer in respect
of an accounting period —
(a) to deliver not later than the due date any statement
required by subsection (2) to be delivered by theauthorised insurer, or
(b) to pay the stamp duty chargeable on any such state-
ment on the delivery of the statement,
the authorised insurer shall —[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(i) from that due date until the day on which the stamp
duty is paid, be liable to pay, in addition to the duty,interest on the stamp duty calculated in accordancewith section 159D, and
(ii) from that due date, be liable to pay a penalty of \380
for each day the duty remains unpaid.
(7) Where during any accounting period but before the due
date —
(a) an authorised insurer ceases to carry on a business in
the course of which the insurer is required to delivera statement (in this subsection referred to as the‘first-mentioned statement ’) pursuant to subsection
(2) (including any case where the authorised insureris so required by virtue of the prior operation of thissubsection) but has not done so before that cesser,and
(b) another person (in this subsection referred to as the
‘successor ’) acquires the whole, or substantially the
whole, of the business,
then —
(i) the authorised insurer is not required to deliver the
first-mentioned statement, and
(ii) the successor shall —
(I) if the successor is, apart from this subsection,
required to deliver a statement (in this subsec-tion referred to as the ‘second-mentioned
statement ’) pursuant to subsection (2)
(including any case where the successor is sorequired by virtue of the prior operation of thissubsection) in respect of the same accountingperiod but has not done so before that acquis-ition, include in that second-mentioned state-ment the number of insured persons that wouldhave been required to have been shown in thefirst-mentioned statement had the authorisedinsurer not ceased to carry on the businessconcerned,
(II) if subparagraph (I) is not applicable, deliver the
first-mentioned statement as if the successorwere the authorised insurer.
(8) The delivery of any statement required by subsection (2)
may be enforced by the Commissioners under section 47 of theSuccession Duty Act 1853 in all respects as if such statementwere such account as is mentioned in that section and the failureto deliver such statement were such default as is mentioned inthat section.
(9) The stamp duty, interest and any penalty payable under
this section shall not be allowed as a deduction for the purposesof the computation of any tax or duty payable by the authorisedinsurer which is under the care and management of the Com-missioners.
45Pt.4 S.26Pt.4 S.26
46[No. 24.] [2009.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(10) Where an insured person, being the individual referred
to in the definition of ‘insured person ’, shows to the satisfaction
of an authorised insurer (in this subsection referred to as the‘second authorised insurer ’) that another authorised insurer (in
this subsection referred to the ‘first authorised insurer ’) with
whom that individual renewed, or entered into, a relevant con-tract during an accounting period, was required to include thatinsured person in a statement to be delivered pursuant to sub-section (2) to the Commissioners in respect of the same account-ing period, then the second authorised insurer, with whom theindividual entered into a later relevant contract during the sameaccounting period, may exclude such insured person from thestatement to be delivered pursuant to subsection (2) to the Com-missioners by the second authorised insurer in respect of thesame accounting period.
(11) Where an insured person, being an insured person under
a relevant contract who is not the individual referred to in thedefinition of ‘insured person ’in relation to the relevant contract
concerned, shows to the satisfaction of an authorised insurer (inthis subsection referred to as the ‘second authorised insurer ’)
that another authorised insurer (in this subsection referred to asthe ‘first authorised insurer ’) with whom that person was an
insured person named on a relevant contract renewed, orentered into, by an individual referred to in the definition of‘insured person ’during an accounting period, was required to
include that insured person in a statement to be delivered pursu-ant to subsection (2) to the Commissioners for the sameaccounting period, then the second authorised insurer, withwhom the insured person entered into a relevant contract duringthe same accounting period, may exclude such insured personfrom the statement to be delivered pursuant to subsection (2) tothe Commissioners by the second authorised insurer in respectof the same accounting period.
(12) Section 126B shall apply to a statement referred to in
subsection (2) as if a reference to this section were included inthe definition of ‘specified section ’in subsection (1) of that
section.
(13) Where —
(a) a relevant contract is renewed or entered into by an
individual referred to in the definition of ‘insured
person ’during an accounting period (in this subsec-
tion referred to as the ‘initial accounting period ’),
and
(b) the relevant contract is for a period of more than 12
months,
then, without prejudice to the treatment to be accorded to the
relevant contract and the initial accounting period by subsection(2), the relevant contract shall be deemed, for the purposes ofthis section, to be renewed during —
(i) the accounting period which immediately succeeds the
initial accounting period if the second 12 months, orlesser period, of the relevant contract commencesduring such immediately succeeding accountingperiod, and[2009.] [ No. 24.] Health Insurance (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(ii) each further accounting period where any subsequent
12 months, or lesser period, of the relevant contractcommences during such further accounting period. ”.
PART 5
AMENDMENT OF INSURANCE ACT 1936
27.—Section 3 of the Insurance Act 1936 is amended by substitut-
ing the following definition for the definition of “premium ”:
“the word ‘premium ’means any money or money ’s worth pay-
able or paid to any person who carries on an assurance businessand who in consideration of such money or money ’s worth
undertakes any liability under any policy, bond or certificate,except that, for the purposes of —
(a) calculating the solvency measures of such business
(including any solvency margin or solvency ratiothereof), or
(b) computing such a person ’s profits for an accounting
period for the purposes of corporation tax within themeaning of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997,
such word does not include money or money ’s worth of an
amount equal to the amount payable or paid by such a personin respect of a stamp duty under section 125A of the StampDuties Consolidation Act 1999; ”.
47Pt.4 S.26
Amendment of
section 3 ofInsurance Act 1936.