————————
Number 5of2009
————————
FINANCIAL EMERGENCY MEASURES IN THE PUBLIC
INTEREST ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Interpretation.
2. Deduction to be made from remuneration of public servants.3. Regulations in relation to collection arrangements, etc.4. Obligation to make payments into Exchequer, etc.5. Certain public servants’ right to give notice.6. Deductions made from remuneration of certain persons who
cease to be public servants.
7. No additional benefit, etc.8. Exemption, etc., from deductions in certain circumstances.9. Reduction of payments to health professionals.
10. Reduction of other payments.11. Non-applicability to public servants.12. Farm Waste Management Scheme.13. Annual review and report to the Houses of the Oireachtas.14. Regulations.15. Removal of doubts.16. Amendment of Income Tax Acts.17. Amendment of Local Government Act 1998 — payments
into Local Government Fund by Minister for theEnvironment, Heritage and Local Government.
12[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
18. Amendment of Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 —
early childcare supplement.
19. Short title.
SCHEDULE
Bodies to which the definition of “Public Service Body” does
not apply
————————
Acts Referred to
Companies Acts
Competition Act 2002 2002, No. 14Defence Act 1954 1954, No. 18Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 2007, No. 24European Assembly (Irish Representatives) Act 1979 1979, No. 19Harbours Act 1946 1946, No. 9Harbours Act 1996 1996, No. 11Local Government Act 1998 1998, No. 16Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Ministerial and Parliamentary Offices Act 1938 1938, No. 38Ministerial, Parliamentary and Judicial Offices and
Oireachtas Members (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2001 2001, No. 33
Oireachtas (Allowances to Members) and Ministerial and
Parliamentary Offices (Amendment) Act 1973 1973, No. 22
Oireachtas (Allowances to Members) and Ministerial,
Parliamentary and Judicial Offices (Amendment) Act1977 1977, No. 29
Oireachtas (Allowances to Members) and Ministerial,
Parliamentary and Judicial Offices (Amendment) Act1983 1983, No. 32
Pensions Act 1990 1990, No. 25Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 2005, No. 26Social Welfare Law Reform and Pensions Act 2006 2006, No. 5Social Welfare (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2008 2008, No. 22Superannuation Acts 1834 to 1963Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Vocational Education Act 1930 1930, No. 29————————
Number 5of2009
————————
FINANCIAL EMERGENCY MEASURES IN THE PUBLIC
INTEREST ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT, IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST, TO PROVIDE FOR THE
PAYMENT OF A CONTRIBUTION BY CERTAIN PER-SONS IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE (INCLUDINGMEMBERS OF THE HOUSES OF THE OIREACHTASAND CERTAIN OFFICE HOLDERS) WHO AREMEMBERS OF AN OCCUPATIONAL PENSION SCHEMEOR PENSION ARRANGEMENT (BY WHATEVER NAMECALLED) WHICH IS PROVIDED FOR UNDER THESUPERANNUATION ACTS 1834 TO 1963 OR ANYOTHER ENACTMENT OR ADMINISTRATIVEMEASURE TO LIKE EFFECT OR IS REQUIRED TO BEMADE, APPROVED OF OR CONSENTED TO(HOWEVER EXPRESSED) BY ONE OR MORE THANONE MINISTER OF THE GOVERNMENT, TO PROVIDEFOR THE REDUCTION OF THE AMOUNT PAYABLE,OR RATE OF PAYMENT, OUT OF MONEY PROVIDEDBY THE OIREACHTAS OR THE CENTRAL FUND ORTHE GROWING PRODUCE OF THAT FUND TO CER-TAIN PERSONS FOR CERTAIN SERVICES TO OR ONBEHALF OF THE STATE, TO PROVIDE FOR THEAMENDMENT OF SECTION 4 OF THE LOCAL GOVERN-MENT ACT 1998, THE INCOME TAX ACTS AND PART4A OF THE SOCIAL WELFARE CONSOLIDATION ACT2005, TO PROVIDE FOR THE DEFERRAL OF LIABILIT-IES, ACCRUALS OR PAYMENTS DUE UNDER ASCHEME KNOWN AS THE FARM WASTE MANAGE-MENT SCHEME AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATEDMATTERS.
[27th February , 2009]
WHEREAS a serious disturbance in the economy and a decline
in the economic circumstances of the State have occurred, whichthreaten the well-being of the community;
AND WHEREAS as a consequence a serious deterioration in the
revenues of the State has occurred and there are significant andincreasing Exchequer commitments in respect of public servicepensions;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to cut current Exchequer spend-
ing substantially to demonstrate to the international financialmarkets that public expenditure is being significantly controlled soas to ensure continued access to international funding, and to protectthe State’s credit rating and reverse the erosion of the State’s inter-national competitiveness;
3Interpretation.
4[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
AND WHEREAS the burden of job losses and salary reductions
in the private sector has been very substantial and it is equitable thatthe public sector should share that burden;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to take the measures in this Act
as part of a range of measures to address the economic crisis;
AND WHEREAS the value of public service pensions is signifi-
cantly and markedly more favourable than those generally availablein other employment—
BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS
FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Civil Service” means the Civil Service of the Government and the
Civil Service of the State;
“Minister” means the Minister for Finance;“public servant” means—
(a) a person who is employed by, or who holds any office or
other position in, a public service body,
(b) a member of either House of the Oireachtas or of a local
authority (within the meaning of the Local GovernmentAct 2001),
(c) a member of the European Parliament for a constituency
in the State, being a member who is in receipt of theallowance referred to in section 2 of the EuropeanAssembly (Irish Representatives) Act 1979, or
(d) the holder of a qualifying office,
but does not include the President, a member of the judiciary or a
military judge appointed under Chapter IVC of Part V of theDefence Act 1954 (as amended by the Defence (Amendment) Act2007);
“public service body” means—
(a) the Civil Service,
(b) the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
(c) the Permanent Defence Force,
(d) a local authority for the purposes of the Local Govern-
ment Act 2001,
(e) the Health Service Executive,
(f) the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of
Ireland,[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
(g) a vocational education committee established under
section 7 of the Vocational Education Act 1930,
(h) a body (other than a body specified or referred to in the
Schedule) established—
(i) by or under an enactment (other than the Companies
Acts), or
(ii) under the Companies Acts in pursuance of powers
conferred by or under another enactment, andfinanced wholly or partly by means of money pro-vided, or loans made or guaranteed, by a Minister ofthe Government or the issue of shares held by or onbehalf of a Minister of the Government,
in respect of which a public service pension scheme exists
or applies or may be made,
(i) a body (other than a body specified or referred to in the
Schedule) that is wholly or partly funded directly orindirectly out of money provided by the Oireachtas orfrom the Central Fund or the growing produce of thatFund and in respect of which a public service pensionscheme exists or applies or may be made,
(j) any subsidiary of, or company controlled (within the
meaning given by section 10 of the Taxes ConsolidationAct 1997) by, a body to which paragraph (d) ,(e),(f),(g),
(h)or(i)relates and in respect of which a public service
pension scheme exists or applies or may be made;
“public service pension scheme” means an occupational pension
scheme or pension arrangement, by whatever name called, for anypart of the public service which—
(a) is provided for under—
(i) the Superannuation Acts 1834 to 1963, or
(ii) any other enactment or administrative measure for
the like purpose and to the like effect as thoseActs, or
(b) is made by a relevant Minister or has been approved or
requires the approval or consent, however expressed, ofeither or both a relevant Minister and the Minister,
but does not include such a scheme or arrangement in respect of a
body specified or referred to in the Schedule;
“qualifying office” has the same meaning as it has in section 13
(inserted by the Oireachtas (Allowances to Members) and Minis-terial, Parliamentary and Judicial Offices (Amendment) Act 1977) ofthe Ministerial and Parliamentary Offices Act 1938, that is to say—
(a) a ministerial office within the meaning of that section (as
amended by the Oireachtas (Allowances to Members)and Ministerial and Parliamentary Offices (Amendment)Act 1973), or
5S.1S.1
Deduction to be
made fromremuneration ofpublic servants.
6[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
(b) a secretarial office within the meaning of that section (as
amended by the Oireachtas (Allowances to Members)and Ministerial, Parliamentary and Judicial Offices(Amendment) Act 1983 and the Ministerial, Parliamen-tary and Judicial Offices and Oireachtas Members(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2001);
“relevant Minister”, in relation to a public service pension scheme,
means the Minister or Ministers of the Government responsible forthe making or approval of, or the giving of consent to, the scheme;
“remuneration” means emoluments to which Chapter 4 of Part 42 of
the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 applies or is applied and payableby or on behalf of a public service body to a public servant for hisor her services as a public servant;
“subsidiary” means a subsidiary within the meaning of the Compan-
ies Acts.
2.—(1) This section applies to a person—
(a) who—
(i) is a public servant on 1 March 2009, or
(ii) is not a public servant on that date but after that date
is appointed or otherwise becomes a public servant,
and
(b) who, on 1 March 2009 or at any time afterwards—
(i) is a member of a public service pension scheme,
(ii) is entitled to a benefit under such a scheme, or
(iii) receives a payment in lieu of membership in such a
scheme.
(2) In this section, a person to whom this section applies is
referred to as a “relevant person”.
(3) The person who is responsible for, or authorises, the payment
of remuneration to a relevant person shall deduct or cause to bededucted an amount at the applicable rate or rates specified in theTable in this subsection—
(a) in the case of the period 1 March 2009 to 31 December
2009, in respect of that period, and
(b) in the case of the year 2010 and each subsequent year, in
respect of the year concerned,
from the remuneration from time to time payable to the relevant
person during that period or any such year.[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
TABLE
Amount of Remuneration Rate of deduction
Up to \15,000 3 per cent
Any excess over \15,000 but not over 6 per cent
\20,000
Any amount over \20,000 10 per cent
(4) The deduction which this section requires shall be made in
accordance with any regulations made by the Minister undersection 3 .
(5) This section has effect notwithstanding—
(a) any other enactment,
(b) any pension scheme or arrangement,
(c) any other agreement or contractual arrangement, or
(d) any understanding, expectation, circular or instrument or
other document.
3.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of
the calculation, making, collection, disposal and recovery ofdeductions made under section 2 .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the Mini-
ster may make provision in regulations under this section for any ofthe following:
(a) the calculation, deduction and collection of deductions to
be made on the basis of the best estimate that can reason-ably be made of remuneration likely to be chargeable totax under Schedule E to the Taxes Consolidation Act1997 during the period concerned and the averaging ofdeductions from each public servant over that period;
(b) the deduction, from any grant or vote of, or other payment
to, a public service body out of money provided directlyor indirectly by the Oireachtas or from the Central Fundor the growing produce of that Fund, of such sum asnearly as can be estimated represents all or some of thedeductions under section 2 that will fall due during the
period to which the grant, vote or other payment relatesand for the issuing of directions by the Minister to thepersons concerned;
(c) dealing with any overpayment or underpayment of
deductions;
(d) subject to sections 2(3) and 4, the manner in which, and
the periods within which, deductions are to be made anddeductions, or any class of deductions, are to be paid intoor disposed of for the benefit of the Exchequer;
(e) designating the persons or classes of persons liable to
account for deductions;
7S.2
Regulations in
relation tocollectionarrangements, etc.S.3
Obligation to make
payments intoExchequer, etc.
Certain public
servants’ right togive notice.
Deductions made
from remunerationof certain personswho cease to bepublic servants.
8[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
(f) providing details on a periodic basis to persons concerned
of the amounts deducted under this Act;
(g) where a person fails to deduct or remit deductions in
accordance with this Act and regulations made under thissection, the deduction from any grant or vote of, or otherpayment to, a public service body out of money provideddirectly or indirectly by the Oireachtas or from the Cen-tral Fund or the growing produce of that Fund.
4.—(1) Without prejudice to subsection (2) , and subject to—
(a) any requirement under any regulations made under section
3to repay any overpayment, or
(b) any requirement arising under section 5 or6to repay any
deduction,
deductions made under section 2 shall be paid into or disposed of for
the benefit of the Exchequer in accordance with the directions of theMinister or otherwise paid or disposed of as the Minister may direct.
(2) Where any amount deducted under section 2 (other than an
amount referred to in paragraph (a) or(b)ofsubsection (1) ) has not
been duly remitted in accordance with any regulations under section
3,then the Minister may, in addition to any means of recovery pro-
vided for by regulations under that section, recover the amount fromthe person obliged to remit it as a simple contract debt in any courtof competent jurisdiction.
5.—(1) A public servant (other than a serving member of the Per-
manent Defence Force) who on 1 March 2009 had less than twoyears in service and was accruing benefits in a public service pensionscheme but did not have any preserved rights to a pension underthat scheme may give, at any time before 1 April 2009, one month’swritten notice to terminate his or her employment, office or positionas a public servant.
(2) A written notice in accordance with subsection (1) has effect
without that person being required to comply with any contractualor statutory requirement to give any longer period of notice beforeceasing to be a public servant.
(3) Where a person to whom subsection (1) relates terminates his
or her employment, office or position as a public servant after 1March 2009 in accordance with that subsection, and at the time oftermination has less than two years in service, then, notwithstandingany other provision of this Act, any deduction made pursuant tosection 2 from the remuneration of that person as a public servant
shall be repaid to him or her.
6.—(1) Any deduction made pursuant to section 2 (other than in
respect of a person to whom subsection (1)(b)(iii) of that section
relates) from the remuneration as a public servant of a person whoceases to be a public servant, to whom no superannuation benefit(including preserved benefit, within the meaning given by section28 of the Pensions Act 1990) has accrued and whose service is nottransferred to another public service body in accordance with[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
arrangements approved by the Minister for the Environment, Heri-
tage and Local Government or the Minister for Finance, shall not betreated as a deduction for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The person liable to account for any deduction referred to in
subsection (1) shall repay it, as soon as practicable, to the person
from whose remuneration it was deducted.
(3) If a person receives a repayment under subsection (2) on ceas-
ing to be a public servant and subsequently wishes to have the servicein respect of which that repayment was made reckoned for superan-nuation purposes, then—
(a) the person shall refund the repayment plus compound
interest (in accordance with arrangements determined bythe Minister) to the person who made the repayment tohim or her, and
(b) that refund plus the amount of interest payable under
paragraph (a) is to be treated as a deduction under
section 2 .
7.—(1) Nothing in this Act is to be read as conferring any
additional benefit payable, or that may become payable, under apublic service pension scheme.
(2) A deduction under section 2 is not a pension contribution for
the purposes of the Pensions Act 1990.
8.—Where the Minister is satisfied that there is a particular class or
group of public servants who, by reason of exceptional circumstances(because of some particular aspect or condition of their employment,office or position) which, in the Minister’s opinion, are materiallydistinguished from other classes or groups of public servants to whichsection 2 applies, then the Minister, if he or she considers it to be just
and equitable in all the circumstances to do so, may by direction—
(a) exempt that class or group from deductions under section
2, either entirely or to such extent as the Minister con-
siders appropriate, or
(b) modify the obligation under section 2 to make deductions
from their remuneration in such manner as the Ministerthinks fit, having regard to the nature and degree of thefinancial burden that would otherwise be borne by thatclass or group,
and the provisions of this Act relating to deductions, and of any
regulations made under any of those provisions, shall be read subjectto any such direction.
9.—(1) Notwithstanding any other enactment, contract, arrange-
ment, understanding, expectation, circular or instrument or otherdocument, the Minister for Health and Children may, with the con-sent of the Minister for Finance, by regulation, reduce, whether byformula or otherwise, the amount or the rate of payment to be madeto health professionals, or classes of health professionals, in respectof any services that they render to or on behalf of a health bodyfrom the date of the regulation.
9S.6
No additional
benefit, etc.
Exemption, etc.,
from deductions incertaincircumstances.
Reduction of
payments to healthprofessionals.S.9
10[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
(2) Subsection (1) shall apply to the services rendered from the
date of the regulation, notwithstanding that the health professionalsconcerned may have commenced the provision of the service priorto the date of the regulation.
(3) A regulation made under subsection (1) may fix different
amounts or rates for different services, and as and from the date ofthe regulation, there shall be no entitlement to payment in excess ofthe amounts and rates so specified, although nothing in this sectionshall prevent any health professional from providing a service for alesser amount or at a lower rate.
(4) Prior to making a regulation under subsection (1) , the Minister
for Health and Children, or, at that Minister’s direction, the healthbody concerned, shall engage in such consultations as that Ministerconsiders appropriate.
(5) A regulation made under subsection (1) shall fix amounts or
rates that the Minister for Health and Children considers to be fairand reasonable in the light of the purposes of this Act, having regardto the matters which that Minister considers appropriate, includingany or all of the following:
(a) the terms of any existing contractual arrangements or
understandings with the health professionals concernedor any expectation on their part;
(b) the terms of any circular, instrument, or document which
apply to the health professionals concerned;
(c) any submissions made and views expressed during the con-
sultations under subsection (4) ;
(d) the nature of the services rendered by different classes of
health professionals and the general nature of expensesand commitments of the health professionals providingthose services;
(e) the impact on the State’s ability to continue to provide
health services at existing levels if reductions are notmade; and
(f) the fairness and efficiency of any method of effecting any
reductions in payments having regard to the require-ments of good and effective administration.
(6) The powers conferred on or exercised by the Minister for
Health and Children under this section shall not affect any existingright to negotiate or amend rates or contracts generally which thatMinister or the health body concerned enjoys apart from this section,and those rights may be exercised in conjunction with, in addition toor instead of the powers conferred by this Act.
(7) Consultations under subsection (4) shall be completed no later
than 30 days after the Minister for Health and Children gives noticeof the commencement of the consultations.
(8) A health professional who does not wish to continue to render
services to or on behalf of the health body concerned on the basis ofa payment regime fixed in a regulation made under subsection (1)
may give 30 days’ notice to that effect to the health body and, on theexpiration of those 30 days, shall be relieved of any obligation to[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
render those services notwithstanding any contractual or other term
with regard to notice.
(9) If a health body receives notice from a health professional
under subsection (8) , it may, notwithstanding any other enactment,
contract, implementing circular, instrument or other document,engage the services of other health professionals to ensure that theservices continue to be available.
(10) The Minister for Health and Children may define the manner
in which consultations under subsection (4) are to be conducted and
conduct them in such manner, and with such representatives ofhealth professionals or otherwise, as he or she considers appropriate,and nothing in the Competition Act 2002 shall prevent participationby that Minister or any such representative in such consultations, orthe communication and discussion of the outcome of such consul-tations by the representatives with the health professionals theyrepresent.
(11) The Minister for Health and Children may make regulations
to do anything that appears necessary or expedient for bringing thissection into operation, or facilitating its operation, with a view tofulfilling the purposes for which this Act was enacted.
(12) Regulations made under subsection (11) may contain such
incidental, supplementary and consequential provisions as appear tothe Minister for Health and Children to be necessary or expedientfor the purposes of the regulations.
(13) Without prejudice to section 13 , the Minister for Health and
Children may from time to time and shall, before 30 June in 2010
and every year after 2010, carry out a review of the operation, effec-tiveness and impact of the amounts and rates fixed by regulationunder this section and consider the appropriateness of those amountsand rates, having regard to any change of circumstances and in part-icular any alteration of any of the matters mentioned in subsection
(5).
(14) If, after completing a review under subsection (13) , the Mini-
ster for Health and Children considers it appropriate to do so, thatMinister may, with the consent of the Minister for Finance, by regu-lation adjust (whether by formula or otherwise) the amount or therate of payment to be made to health professionals, or classes ofhealth professionals, in respect of any services that they render to oron behalf of a health body from the date of the regulation.
(15) Subsections (2) to(12) apply, with the necessary modifi-
cations, to the making of regulations under subsection (14) .
(16) Regulations made under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after they are made and,if a resolution annulling the regulations is passed by either suchHouse within the next 21 days on which that House has sat afterthe regulations are laid before it, the regulations shall be annulledaccordingly, but without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-viously done under the regulations.
(17) In this section—
“health body” means the Health Service Executive and any other
body under the aegis of the Minister for Health and Children wholly
11S.9S.9
Reduction of other
payments.
Non-applicability to
public servants.
12[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
or partly funded by the Exchequer to which, or on behalf of which,
health professionals render services; and
“health professional” includes—
(a) a registered medical practitioner,
(b) a registered dentist,
(c) a registered pharmacist,
(d) an optometrist,
(e) an ophthalmologist,
(f) a podiatrist, and
(g) a chiropodist.
(18) Where the provider of a service of a kind normally provided
by a health professional is a company or other body corporate, orthe legal personal representative of a deceased health professional,a reference in this section to a health professional includes the com-pany or other body corporate or legal personal representative.
(19) In this section, payment in respect of a service rendered by
a health professional includes payment in respect of goods providedby that health professional as part of the service.
10.—(1) Notwithstanding any other enactment, contract, arrange-
ment, understanding, expectation, circular or instrument or otherdocument, any Minister of the Government may, with the consent ofthe Minister for Finance, by regulation, reduce, whether by formulaor otherwise, the amount or the rate of payment to be made to per-sons, or classes of persons, in respect of any service that they renderto or on behalf of that Minister of the Government or under theaegis of that Minister.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, any service rendered to the State
that is not rendered to or on behalf of a Minister of the Governmentor under the aegis of such a Minister is to be taken to be renderedto the Minister for Finance. The Minister for Finance may exercisethe powers conferred by subsection (1) in relation to the persons
rendering such services.
(3) Where the Minister by whom regulations are to be made
under subsection (1) or(2)is the Minister for Finance, the reference
insubsection (1) to obtaining the consent of that Minister is to be dis-
regarded.
(4) A Minister of the Government making regulations under sub-
section (1) shall have all the powers enjoyed by the Minister for
Health and Children under section 9 and shall likewise be subject to
all the obligations imposed on the Minister for Health and Childrenunder that section.
(5) Subsections (2) to(16) and (19) ofsection 9 apply, with the
necessary modifications, to a Minister of the Government makingregulations, and to regulations made, under subsection (1) .
11.—The provisions of sections 9 and 10and of regulations made
under those sections shall not apply to the remuneration of a personin respect of which a deduction is made under section 2 .[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
12.—(1) The Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food may by
order defer to a specified date any liability, accrual or payment underthe Farm Waste Management Scheme in whole or in part if, havingconsulted the Minister, he or she is of the opinion that it is necessaryto do so, having regard to—
(a) the purposes of this Act, and
(b) the resources available to the Minister for Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food from time to time to make paymentsunder the Scheme.
(2) The date specified in an order under subsection (1) may be in
the financial year after the one during which the order is made orany subsequent financial year.
(3) If the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food defers a
liability, accrual or payment under subsection (1) —
(a) no obligation to make any payment arises in respect of the
amount deferred, and
(b) there is no liability to pay, nor accrual of, the amount,
before the date specified by that Minister in the order concerned.
(4) A deferral under this section has effect notwithstanding the
terms of the Farm Waste Management Scheme or any entitlementhowever arising.
(5) An order under this section shall be laid before each House
of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if a resol-ution annulling the order is passed by either such House within thenext 21 days on which that House has sat after the order is laidbefore it, the order shall be annulled accordingly but without preju-dice to the validity of anything previously done under the order.
(6) In this section “Farm Waste Management Scheme” means the
scheme which came into effect on 23 March 2006, and is known asthe Scheme of Investment Aid for Farm Waste Management.
13.—Before 30 June in 2010 and every year after 2010, the Mini-
ster shall—
(a) carry out a review of the operation, effectiveness and
impact of this Act, having regard to the overall economicconditions in the State and national competitiveness,
(b) consider whether or not any of the provisions of this Act
continue to be necessary having regard to the purposesof this Act, the overall economic conditions in the State,national competitiveness and Exchequer commitments inrespect of public service pensions,
(c) make such findings as he or she thinks appropriate
consequent on such review and consideration, and
(d) cause a written report of his or her findings resulting from
the review and consideration to be prepared and laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas.
13Farm Waste
ManagementScheme.
Annual review and
report to theHouses of theOireachtas.Regulations.
Removal of doubts.
Amendment of
Income Tax Acts.
14[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
14.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of
this Act or in consequence of any of its provisions or for the purposeof enabling any provision to have full effect.
(2) Regulations made by the Minister under this section may con-
tain such incidental, supplementary and consequential provisions asappear to the Minister to be necessary or expedient for the purposesof the regulations.
(3) Regulations under this section shall be laid before each House
of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after they are made and if aresolution annulling the regulations is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after the regu-lations are laid before it, the regulations shall be annulled accord-ingly but without prejudice to the validity of anything previouslydone under the regulations.
15.—Where a doubt, question or dispute arises in the operation of
this Act in respect of whether a person is or is not a person subjectto deduction under this Act, then such doubt, question or disputeshall—
(a) be submitted to the Minister by the person who authorises
or would authorise the payment of the remuneration con-cerned, and
(b) be determined by the Minister after consulting such per-
sons (if any) as the Minister considers appropriate inthe circumstances,
and the determination of the doubt, question or dispute by the Mini-
ster shall be final.
16.—(1) The Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 is amended in Chap-
ter 4 of Part 30 by inserting the following section after section 790B:
“Relief for
deductionunderFinancialEmergencyMeasures inthe PublicInterest Act2009 .790C.—Any deduction made under the Finan-
cial Emergency Measures in the Public Interest Act2009 in respect of a public servant (within the
meaning of that Act) shall, in assessing income taxunder Schedule E, be allowed to be deducted asan expense incurred in the year in which thededuction is made.”.
(2) The Income Tax (Employments) (Consolidated) Regulations
2001 (S.I. No. 559 of 2001) are amended in Regulation 41—
(a) by substituting “ ‘allowable contribution’ means a contri-
bution or a deduction payable by an employee” for“ ‘allowable contribution’ means a contribution payableby an employee”,
(b) in paragraph ( c) by substituting “paid,” for “paid, or”, and
in paragraph ( d) by substituting “paid, or” for “paid.”,
and
(c) by inserting the following after paragraph ( d):
“(e) by virtue of section 790C of the Act (inserted
bysection 16 of the Financial Emergency[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
Measures in the Public Interest Act 2009 ) allow-
able as a deduction from such emoluments forthe purposes of assessment under ScheduleE.”.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) shall be read so as to affect the
powers conferred on the Revenue Commissioners under section 986of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 to make, amend or revokeRegulations under that section, including Regulation 41 of theIncome Tax (Employments) (Consolidated) Regulations 2001 asamended by that subsection.
17.—The Local Government Act 1998 is amended in section 4—
(a) by deleting subsections (1) to (5), and
(b) by inserting the following before subsection (6):
“(5A) The Minister shall pay into the Fund for the fin-
ancial year 2009 and each subsequent financial year anamount, such as he or she shall determine, with the con-sent of the Minister for Finance.”.
18.—(1) The Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 is amended
in Part 4A (inserted by section 28 of the Social Welfare Law Reformand Pensions Act 2006)—
(a) in section 223A (substituted by section 21 of the Social
Welfare (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2008) by substi-tuting “5 years” for “5 years and 6 months”, and
(b) in section 223B (as so substituted)—
(i) in subsection (1) by substituting “ \996” for “ \1,104”
and “ \83” for “ \92”,
(ii) in subsection (2) by substituting “5 years” for “5 years
and 6 months”, and
(iii) in subsection (3) by substituting “5 years” for “5 years
and 6 months”,
and sections 223A and 223B, as so amended, are set out in the Table
to this section.
(2) This section comes into operation, or is to be taken to have
come into operation, on 1 March 2009.
TABLE
Entitlement to 223A.—Subject to this Part, a person who is a qualified person
early childcare for the purposes of Part 4 shall, so long as he or she remains sosupplement. qualified, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas a
monthly payment (in this Act referred to as ‘early childcaresupplement’) in accordance with section 223B in respect of eachqualified child (within the meaning of section 219) until such timeas the qualified child attains the age of 5 years.
Amount of 223B.—(1) Subject to this Act, the maximum amount of earlyearly childcare childcare supplement payable under section 223A in respect ofsupplement. each qualified child shall not exceed \996 in any year, payable in
equal monthly instalments of \83.
15S.16
Amendment of
Local GovernmentAct 1998 —payments into LocalGovernment Fundby Minister for theEnvironment,Heritage and LocalGovernment.
Amendment of
Social WelfareConsolidation Act2005 — earlychildcaresupplement.S.18
Short title.
Section 1.
16[No. 5.] [2009.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
(2) Early childcare supplement shall be payable in respect of
the month following the month of the birth of the child and shallcontinue to be payable up to and including the month in whichthe child attains the age of 5 years.
(3) Early childcare supplement shall be paid monthly in arrears
and the final payment shall be in respect of the month in whichthe child attains the age of 5 years.
(4) Regulations which may be made under section 242(1)( a)
providing for the time and manner of payment of early childcaresupplement shall be subject to the consent of the Minister forFinance and the Minister for Health and Children.
19.—This Act may be cited as the Financial Emergency Measures
in the Public Interest Act 2009.
SCHEDULE
Bodies to which the definition of “Public Service Body” does
not apply
1. Any body corporate established by Act of Parliament before 6
December 1922 that, upon its establishment, was of a commer-cial character.
2. Dublin Airport Authority, public limited company.3. Cork Airport Authority, public limited company.4. Shannon Airport Authority, public limited company.5. Bord Ga ´is E´ireann.
6. Bord na gCon.7. Bord na Mo ´na.
8. Co ´ras Iompair E ´ireann.
9. Coillte Teoranta.10. Electricity Supply Board.11. Eirgrid.12. A harbour authority within the meaning of the Harbours Act
1946 or company to which section 7 of the Harbours Act1996 relates.
13. Horse Racing Ireland.14. Irish National Stud Company Limited.15. Irish Aviation Authority.16. An Post.17. An Post National Lottery Company.[2009.] [ No. 5.] Financial Emergency Measures in the
Public Interest Act 2009 .
18. Radio Teilifı ´sE´ireann.
19. Teilifı ´s na Gaeilge.
20. Railway Procurement Agency.21. Voluntary Health Insurance Board.22. A subsidiary of a body to which this Schedule relates, includ-
ing a subsidiary of any such subsidiary.
17Sch.