————————
Number 20of2007
————————
PHARMACY ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.3. Expenses.4. Repeals and revocations.
PART 2
The Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland
5. Dissolution of old and establishment and membership of new
Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland.
6. Status of the Society.7. Functions of the Society.8. Additional functions.9. Ancillary powers.
PART 3
The Council of the Society
10. The Council of the Society.
11. Functions of the Council and their delegation.12. Codes of conduct: reference to Competition Authority and
Ministerial consent.
12[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
PART 4
Pharmaceutical Registration System
13. Registers.14. Procedure and criteria for registration of pharmacists.15. Registration of persons registered or entitled to be registered
under repealed legislation.
16. Qualifications for practice.17. Procedure and criteria for registration of retail pharmacy
businesses.
18. Regulation of retail pharmacy businesses.19. Inspection of premises of retail pharmacy business for the
purposes of section 18 .
20. Certificate of registration.21. Refusal to register: notification and appeal.22. Maintenance and correction of registers.23. Evidence as to the registers.24. Roll of pharmacy students.
PART 5
Offences
25. Interpretation of Part 5 .
26. Conduct of retail pharmacy business: offences.27. Carrying on of retail pharmacy business by natural person
or partnership.
28. Carrying on of retail pharmacy business by corporate body.29. Carrying on of retail pharmacy business by representative.30. Saving for temporary cover by pharmaceutical assistant.31. Offence of providing skilled pharmaceutical assistance by
unregistered person.
32. Offence of holding oneself out as registered pharmacist or
registered druggist.
PART 6
Complaints, Inquiries and Discipline
33. Interpretation of Part 6 .
34. Disciplinary committees.35. Complaints about registered pharmacists.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
36. Complaints about registered retail pharmacy businesses.
37. Mediation of complaints.38. Reference of complaints to preliminary proceedings commit-
tee for advice.
39. Action by Council on advice for no further action.40. Procedure following recommendation for, or decision to
take, further action.
41. Notification of referral of complaint to committee of inquiry
and of hearing.
42. Hearings: procedure.43. Hearings: evidence, powers, immunities, offences, etc.44. Procedure following withdrawal of complaint.45. Interim suspension of registration.46. Undertaking and consents.47. Committee’s inquiry report.48. Action by Council on report by disciplinary committee.49. Notification of imposition of disciplinary sanction.50. Disciplinary sanction to be confirmed by High Court.
51. High Court’s power to cancel, etc., disciplinary sanction.52. Confirmation by High Court of disciplinary sanction.53. Expert evidence on poor professional performance and pro-
fessional misconduct.
54. Finality of decision of High Court.55. Notification of decision of High Court.56. Notification of sanctions, etc., to Minister.57. Public notice of sanctions, etc.58. Absolute privilege for disciplinary proceedings, etc.59. Cancellation of registration on request.60. Cancellation of registration on failure to pay fee.61. Restoration of registration.62. Removal of conditions imposed under this Part.63. Prohibition on certain economic relationships between phar-
macists or pharmacies and doctors.
34[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
64. Prohibitions on carrying on retail pharmacy businesses and
medical practices together and on improper recom-mendations.
65. Saver for certain property interests.
PART 7
Powers of Investigation
66. Definitions.67. Powers of entry, search, seizure, etc.68. Samples.69. Evidence.70. Indemnification of authorised officers.71. Functions of Council on receipt of report of investigation by
authorised officer.
72. Penalties for offences.
PART 8
Miscellaneous and General
73. Restriction of Apothecaries’ Hall Act 1791.74. Amendment of Poisons Act 1961.75. Interpretation of references to pharmaceutical chemists, per-
sons keeping open shop, etc.
76. Codes, rules and regulations.
SCHEDULE 1
The Council and its members and the society’s employees
SCHEDULE 2
Recognition of Professional Qualifications in Pharmacy
SCHEDULE 3
Certificate stating results of test, examination or analysis
SCHEDULE 4
Enactments Repealed
————————[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Animal Remedies Acts 1993 and 2006
Apothecaries’ Hall Act 1791 31 Geo. 3., c.34Bankruptcy Act 1988 1988, No. 27Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33Companies Acts 1963 to 2005Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 1995, No. 22European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 25European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2Family Law (Maintenance of Spouses and Children) Act
1976 1976, No. 11
Irish Medicines Board Act 1995 1995, No. 29Irish Medicines Board Acts 1995 and 2006Medical Practitioners Act 1978 1978, No. 4Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 1977, No. 12Misuse of Drugs Acts 1977 to 2006Partnership Act 1890 53 & 54 Vic., c. 93Pharmacy Act (Ireland) 1875 38 & 39 Vic., c.57Pharmacy Act, (Ireland) Amendment Act 1890 53 & 54 Vic., c.48Pharmacy Act 1951 1951, No. 30Pharmacy Act 1962 1962, No. 14Pharmacy Acts 1875 to 1977Poisons Act 1961 1961, No. 12Poisons Acts 1961 and 1977Poisons and Pharmacy Act 1908 8 Edw. 7., c. 55Powers of Attorney Act 1996 1996, No. 12Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875 38 & 39 Vic., c.63Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Trade Marks Act 1996 1996, No. 6
56————————
Number 20of2007
————————
PHARMACY ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO MAKE NEW PROVISION FOR THE REGU-
LATION OF PHARMACY, INCLUDING PROVISION FORTHE DISSOLUTION OF THE PHARMACEUTICALSOCIETY OF IRELAND AND THE SETTING UP OF ANEW PHARMACEUTICAL SOCIETY OF IRELAND, FORTHE ESTABLISHMENT, CONSTITUTION AND FUNC-TIONS OF THE NEW SOCIETY’S COUNCIL, FOR A NEWSYSTEM OF REGISTRATION OF QUALIFIED PHARMA-CISTS, DRUGGISTS AND PHARMACEUTICAL ASSIST-ANTS AND OF PHARMACIES, FOR THE CREATION OFCERTAIN OFFENCES RELATING TO PHARMACY ANDFOR THE SETTING UP OF NEW PROCEDURES TOENSURE THAT PHARMACISTS ARE AND CONTINUETO BE FIT TO PRACTISE AND TO PREVENT PHARMA-CISTS, PHARMACY OWNERS AND MEDICAL PRAC-TITIONERS FROM ENTERING INTO CERTAIN INAP-PROPRIATE RELATIONSHIPS; AND TO PROVIDE FORRELATED MATTERS.
[21st April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Pharmacy Act 2007.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or provisions.
2.—(1) In this Act—
“Company” means a company within the meaning of the Companies
Acts 1963 to 2005;
“Council” means the Council established by section 10 ;
7 Short title and
commencement.
Interpretation.Pt.1S . 2
8[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
“Directive” means Directive 2001/83/EC of 6 November 2001 on the
Community code relating to medicinal products for human use, asamended;
“Enduring power of attorney” means a power of attorney within the
meaning of section 2 of the Powers of Attorney Act 1996, which is anenduring power construed in accordance with section 5 of that Act;
“medicinal product” has the same meaning as in the Directive except
that until 30 April 2011 it does not include herbal or homeopathicmedicinal products;
“Minister” means the Minister for Health and Children;“pharmaceutical assistant” means a person who before the coming
into operation of section 4(1) of this Act was competent, under
section 19 of the Pharmacy Act, (Ireland) Amendment Act 1890 totransact the business of a pharmacist in his or her temporary absence;
“pharmacy owner” means a person carrying on a retail pharmacy
business and, as such, being entitled to the profits and liable to sus-tain the losses of the business and “pharmacy”, when used with refer-ence to a pharmacy owner, means a retail pharmacy business;
“practice” means the carrying on of practice as a registered
pharmacist;
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Council;“register” means a register set up and maintained under section 13
and “registered” and connected expressions shall be construedaccordingly;
“registered medical practitioner” means a person whose name is
entered in the General Register of Medical Practitioners establishedunder the Medical Practitioners Act 1978;
“retail pharmacy business” means a business (not being a pro-
fessional practice carried on by a registered medical practitioner ora registered dentist) which consists of or includes the sale or supplyof medicinal products other than medicinal products on a generalsales list (whether or not such products on such a list are also soldor supplied in the course of the business);
“sale” means sale by retail;“the Society” has the meaning assigned to it by section 5 ;
“the old Society” has the meaning assigned to it by section 5 ;
“supply” in relation to a medicinal product, means its supply (other
than by way of sale) to a person who receives it for a purposeother than—
(a) selling or supplying it, or
(b) administering it or causing it to be administered to
another person,
in the course of a business or profession.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(2) References in this Act to the sale and supply or the sale or
supply of a medicinal product include references to the keeping, pre-paring, compounding or dispensing of the medicinal product.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, two or more premises which are
separate and distinct from each other shall each be regarded as sep-arate premises although they are parts of the same building.
(4) Subsection (3) shall not apply to sections 63 and 64.
(5) In the definition of “retail pharmacy business” in subsection
(1), “medicinal products on a general sales list” means medicinal
products which may be sold under section 32(2)( m)(ii) of the Irish
Medicines Board Act 1995.
3.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of money provided by the Oireachtas.
4.—(1) The enactments specified in Schedule 4 are repealed.
(2) The European Communities (Recognition of Qualifications in
Pharmacy) Regulations 1987 to 2004 are revoked.
PART 2
The Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland
5.—(1) The Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland constituted and
incorporated by section 4 of the Pharmacy (Ireland) Act 1875 (inthis Act referred to as “the old Society”) is hereby dissolved.
(2) There is hereby established in its place a body to be known as
Cumann Co ´gaiseoirı ´na hE ´ireann, or, in the English language, “The
Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland” (in this Act referred to as “theSociety”).
(3) Every registered pharmacist is a member of the Society.(4) All rights, property and liabilities of the old Society are trans-
ferred to the Society.
(5) The Society becomes the employer of all persons who immedi-
ately before the dissolution of the old Society were its employeesand shall employ each of them on terms and conditions not lessfavourable than those then applicable to the employee.
(6) In—
(a) any proceedings in a court or tribunal, and
(b) any contract or other agreement,
to which the old Society is a party, the Society is substituted for the
old Society.
(7) References to the old Society which—
9Pt.1S . 2
Expenses.
Repeals and
revocations.
Dissolution of old
and establishmentand membership ofnew PharmaceuticalSociety of Ireland.Pt.2S . 5
Status of the
Society.
Functions of the
Society.
10[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(a) occur in any enactment passed or made before this Act is
passed, and
(b) relate to anything which becomes the responsibility of the
Society by virtue of this Act,
are to be construed as references to the Society.
(8) Anything done by, on behalf of or in respect of the old Society
which relates to anything which becomes the responsibility of theSociety by virtue of this Act shall be treated as if done by, on behalfof or in respect of the Society.
(9) Enactments are to be construed and applied, so far as it is
possible to do so, in a way which achieves continuity between thefunctions of the old Society and, so far as they correspond, those ofthe Society.
(10) Stamp duty is not chargeable on an instrument under which
any property owned by the old Society is transferred to the Society.
(11) For the purposes of the Capital Gains Tax Acts (within the
meaning of section 1 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997), any gainaccruing to the old Society on a disposal made by virtue of thissection shall not be a chargeable gain.
6.—(1) The Society is a corporate body with perpetual succession
and an official seal.
(2) The official seal of the Society shall be authenticated by—
(a) the signature of 2 members of the Council, or
(b) the signature of a member of the Council and an employee
of the Society,
authorised by the Council to sign for that purpose.
(3) Judicial notice shall be taken of the official seal of the Society
and any document purporting to be an instrument made by andsealed by the Society shall, until the contrary is shown, be receivedin evidence and be deemed to be such instrument without furtherproof.
(4) The Society may sue and may be sued in its corporate name.(5) The Society may acquire, hold and transfer land and other
property.
7.—(1) The principal functions of the Society shall be—
(a) to regulate the profession of pharmacy in the State having
regard to the need to protect, maintain and promote thehealth and safety of the public,
(b) to promote and ensure a high standard of education and
training for persons seeking to become pharmacists,
(c) to ensure that those persons and pharmacists obtain
appropriate experience,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(d) to ensure that pharmacists undertake appropriate continu-
ing professional development, including the acquisitionof specialisation, and
(e) otherwise to supervise compliance with this Act and the
instruments made under it.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , but sub-
ject to the other provisions of this Act—
(a) it is the duty of the Society to—
(i) keep the registers,
(ii) determine and apply the criteria for registration,
(iii) draw up codes of conduct for pharmacists,
(iv) determine, approve and keep under review prog-
rammes of education and training suitable to enablepersons applying for registration to meet thosecriteria and pharmacists to comply with those codes,
(v) give the Minister such information and advice about
such matters relating to its functions as the Ministermay call for,
(vi) act as the competent authority for the purposes of the
mutual recognition of pharmacy qualificationsobtained in or recognised by Member States and forthe purposes of the Professional QualificationsDirective,
(vii) take suitable action to improve the profession of
pharmacy,
(b) the Society shall have power to—
(i) conduct inquiries into the qualifications and fitness of
persons to practise,
(ii) impose sanctions on pharmacists whom it finds
(whether or not after an inquiry) to be unqualifiedor unfit to practise,
(iii) impose sanctions on pharmacy owners whom it finds
(whether or not after an inquiry) have failed to com-ply with regulations under section 18 ,
(iv) to conduct or arrange for the conduct of examinations
of persons who are applying or might apply forregistration,
(v) give the Minister such advice or information about
matters relating to its functions as it thinks fit,
(vi) facilitate the exchange of information between its
members collectively or any sector of them andmembers of the public who use, or might use, theiror its services,
(vii) make public statements about any aspect of pharmacy
to which its functions relate,
11Pt.2S . 7Pt.2S . 7
Additional
functions.
Ancillary powers.
The Council of the
Society.
12[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(viii) borrow money,
(ix) authorise persons to exercise the powers of entry and
inspection, etc., of drugs and documents, as set outin section 24 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1977,
(x) appoint persons as authorised officers for the pur-
poses of the Irish Medicines Board Act 1995 and fur-nish them with warrants, all as set out in section 32Bof that Act.
(3) In subsection (2)(a)(ii) and (iv), “registration” includes con-
tinued registration.
8.—The Minister may, by order—
(a) confer on the Society such additional functions, connected
with those which it has,
(b) make such provision ancillary to the exercise of the power
under paragraph (a) ,
as the Minister thinks fit.
9.—(1) The Society shall have all such powers as are necessary or
expedient for the performance by it of its functions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) orsection
7or8, the Society may—
(a) carry out or commission research into and evaluation of—
(i) education and training (including the formulation and
testing of experimental curricula),
(ii) examination and assessment processes,
(b) keep and publish statistics,
in relation to pharmacy.
PART 3
The Council of the Society
10.—(1) The Society shall have a Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of 21 persons appointed by the
Minister.
(3) Of those 21—
(a) one shall be nominated by the Irish Medicines Board as
representative of the management of the regulation ofmedicinal products,
(b) one shall be nominated by the Health Services Executive
as representative of the management of the publichealth sector,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(c) one shall be a person appearing to the Minister to be rep-
resentative of the provision of continuing professionaldevelopment in relation to pharmacy,
(d) 3 shall be persons with such qualifications, expertise,
interests or experience (or such combination of any ofthem) as would, in the opinion of the Minister, enablethem to make a substantial contribution to the perform-ance of the Society’s functions,
(e) 11 (including the persons referred to in paragraphs (a) to
(d)) shall be persons who are not and never have been—
(i) registered as pharmacists or (before the coming into
operation of Part 4 ) as pharmaceutical chemists or
dispensing chemists and druggists, or
(ii) registered outside the State or otherwise qualified
there as pharmacists,
(f) 9 shall be members of the Society who have been selected
by its members in accordance with rules made undersection 11(2)(b) , and
(g) one shall be a member of the Society who has been selec-
ted as a representative of third level education establish-ments carrying out education, training or research inpharmacy, by—
(i) the deans of the schools of pharmacy of those estab-
lishments (including, where there is no such dean,the person whose functions are the same as or mostnearly correspond to those which might be carriedout by a dean), and
(ii) the heads of those establishments.
(4) In—
(a) making nominations under subsection (3)(a) and (b), the
bodies there referred to, and
(b) making appointments in pursuance of subsection (3)(c) ,
(d)and (e), the Minister,
shall have regard to the desirability of ensuring that the persons
nominated or, as the case may be, appointed are also representativeof the public interest.
(5) In relation to the first Council appointed after the establish-
ment of the Society, the 9 persons referred to in subsection (3)(f)
shall be members of the Council of the old Society selected for thepurposes of this section by the members of the Council of the oldSociety before its dissolution.
(6) Schedule 1 shall apply in relation to the Council and its
members and the employees of the Society.
(7) The Minister may not refuse to appoint to the Council a per-
son nominated under paragraph (a) or(b)ofsubsection (3) or selec-
ted under paragraph (f) (as read with subsection (5) )o r(g)ofsubsec-
tion (3) .
13Pt.3 S.10Pt.3
Functions of the
Council and theirdelegation.
Codes of conduct:
reference toCompetitionAuthority andMinisterial consent.
14[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
11.—(1) Subject to this Act, the functions of the Society shall be
performed on its behalf by the Council.
(2) The Council may make rules for the purposes of—
(a) regulating or prescribing anything that may, in accordance
with any provision of this Act, be prescribed,
(b) making such provision as it thinks fit for facilitating the
performance of its functions under this Act.
(3) The Council shall make rules for the purposes of regulating
or prescribing anything relating to education or training that, inaccordance with this Act, is to be prescribed.
(4) The Council may not make rules under subsection (2) or(3)
for any purpose for which the Minister may make regulations undersection 18 .
(5) Rules made under subsection (2) or(3)shall be subject to
the consent of the Minister and, when the Council has made them,it shall—
(a) submit them to the Minister for laying before each House
of the Oireachtas, and
(b) publish them in such a manner as it determines.
(6) The Council, shall in the prescribed manner, publish—
(a) a draft of the rules it proposes to make under this
section, and
(b) together with the draft, an invitation to the public to com-
ment on the draft by such date as is specified in theinvitation.
(7) The Council shall have such further functions as are assigned
to it by or under this Act.
(8) The Council may delegate any of its functions to any of its
committees or to the registrar or to any other employee of theSociety and, where it delegates a function to a committee, the com-mittee’s remit under this Act shall be extended accordingly.
12.—(1) In performing the function referred to in section
7(2)(a)(iii) , the Council shall—
(a) before giving effect to a code of conduct, submit a draft of
it to the Competition Authority for its opinion as towhether any provision of the draft code would, if giveneffect, be likely to result in competition being prevented,restricted or distorted, and
(b) request that the opinion be given in writing to the Council
before the date specified in the request.
(2) If, before that date, the Council receives from the Competition
Authority a written opinion that a provision of the draft code would,if given effect, be likely to have the result referred to in subsection
(1), the Council shall either—[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(a) taking account of the opinion, change the draft code so as
to obviate that result, or
(b) if they do not so change the draft code, supply to the Mini-
ster, when submitting it for consent under subsection (3) ,
a copy of the opinion and a written statement of itsreasons for not changing the draft code under para-
graph (a) .
(3) A code of conduct shall be subject to the consent of the
Minister.
(4) Subsections (1) to(3)apply also in relation to an amendment
to a code of conduct and (with the substitution for the references inthose subsections to the draft code or any provision in it of referencesto a proposal to revoke a code of conduct) to a revocation of a codeof conduct.
(5) As soon as practicable after giving effect to a code of conduct,
the Council shall—
(a) publish it in such manner as it determines, and
(b) submit it to the Minister for laying before each House of
the Oireachtas.
PART 4
Pharmaceutical Registration System
13.—(1) The Council shall perform the function referred to in
section 7(2)(a)(i) by—
(a) setting up, as soon as practicable after the establishment
of the Society, a register for each of the following:
(i) pharmacists;
(ii) druggists;
(iii) pharmaceutical assistants;
(iv) retail pharmacy businesses,
(b) entering in each of the registers mentioned in subparag-
raphs (i) to(iii) ofparagraph (a) (the “personal
registers”) the name of and other prescribed informationconcerning every person entitled to be registered there,
(c) entering in the retail pharmacy businesses’ register—
(i) the address of the premises in which the business is
being or is to be carried on,
(ii) the name under which it is being or is to be carried on,
(iii) the name of the pharmacy owner, and
(iv) where the pharmacy owner is a corporate body, the
name of the pharmacist specified under section 28(a) ,
15Pt.3 S.12
Registers.Pt.4 S.13
Procedure and
criteria forregistration ofpharmacists.
16[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(d) otherwise maintaining the registers,
(e) ensuring that the information in the registers is available,
without charge, to the public at all reasonable times.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1)(e) , the
Council shall publish each register by means of—
(a) the Internet, and
(b) at least one other method of publication,
within 12 months of the setting up of the register and thereafter at
intervals of not more than 12 months.
(3) The duties imposed by subsections (1)(e) and (2)do not
extend to the home addresses, telephone numbers and e-mailaddresses of individuals and to such other similar information aboutthem as the Council considers should, in the interests of the securityand privacy of those individuals, not be disclosed.
14.—(1) The Council shall register a person in the pharmacists’
register if the person—
(a) makes an application which complies with the prescribed
requirements in relation to such an application,
(b) complies with any requirement which may be imposed by
the Council—
(i) to verify anything contained in the application,
(ii) to supply further information in relation to the
application,
(iii) to make a statutory declaration supplying that
information,
(c) pays the prescribed fee to the Council,
(d) satisfies the Council that the person is fit to be a regis-
tered pharmacist,
(e) holds a qualification appropriate for practice in accord-
ance with section 16 ,
(f) is not an undischarged bankrupt,
(g) not being a national of the State or another Member State,
satisfies the Council that he or she has the linguistic com-petence necessary to be a registered pharmacist in theState,
(h) being a national of the State or another Member State and
lacking that competence, undertakes to acquire it.
(2) In determining whether a person is fit to be a registered phar-
macist, the Council shall have regard to whether the person has—
(a) under the law of another state, been—[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(i) prohibited from carrying on any activity in that state
corresponding to the practice of a pharmacist or thecarrying on of a retail pharmacy business, or
(ii) convicted in that state of an offence the nature of
which has, in the opinion of the Council, a bearingon the person’s fitness to practise,
(b) under the law of the State or another state, been pro-
hibited from carrying on any other practice, profession oroccupation appearing to the Council to consist or mainlyto consist of the provision of health care or services orsocial care or services.
(3) In registering a person who gives an undertaking under sub-
section (1)(h) , the Council may impose a condition that the person
acquires the linguistic competence referred to in that provision
before practising in a way which entails dealing directly with thepublic.
(4) In registering a person whose qualification for practice is one
to which section 16(2)(b) applies, the Council may impose a con-
dition that the person’s practice must be supervised by a registeredpharmacist specified in the condition for such period as is sospecified.
(5) Subsections (1) to(4)apply also in respect of the continued
registration of a person in a personal register.
(6) This section does not apply in respect of the first registration
of a person to whom section 15(1) applies.
(7) Subsection (1)(d) to(g)does not apply in respect of the first
registration of a person who—
(a) at any time during the period of 6 months immediately
before the dissolution of the old Society (in this sectionreferred to as the “dissolution”), became entitled to beregistered as mentioned in an enactment referred to insection 15(1)(a) and, immediately before dissolution, was
still so entitled but was never so registered, or
(b) was, immediately before dissolution, a licentiate of Apoth-
ecaries Hall to whom a certificate under the ApothecariesHall Act 1791 to transact the business of an apothecarywas granted before 31 December 1975.
(8) In this section, “another state” means a state other than the
State.
15.—(1) Subsections (2) and (3)make provision as respects a per-
son who—
(a) immediately before the dissolution of the old Society (in
this section referred to as the “dissolution”) wasregistered—
(i) as a pharmaceutical chemist under the Pharmacy Act
(Ireland) 1875 or as a dispensing chemist and drug-gist under the Pharmacy Act 1951,
17Pt.4 S.14
Registration of
persons registeredor entitled to beregistered underrepealed legislation.Pt.4 S.15
Qualifications for
practice.
18[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(ii) as a druggist under the Pharmacy Act, (Ireland)
Amendment Act 1890,
(b) before dissolution, was a pharmaceutical assistant.
(2) As soon as practicable after dissolution the Council shall—
(a) in the case of a person to whom subsection (1)(a)(i)
applies, register the person in the pharmacists’ register,
(b) in the case of a person to whom subsection (1)(a)(ii)
applies, register the person in the druggists’ register,
(c) in the case of a person to whom subsection (1)(b) applies,
register the person in the pharmaceutical assistants’register.
(3) A person who is to be registered under subsection (2) shall be
regarded, for all purposes except those of that subsection, as havingbeen so registered immediately upon dissolution.
16.—(1) A person holds a qualification appropriate for practice if
he or she has received in the State the prescribed training and edu-cation and has the prescribed qualifications.
(2) A person applying for registration in the pharmacists’ register
who does not hold a qualification appropriate for practice as a phar-macist by virtue of subsection (1) shall be regarded as having a quali-
fication appropriate for practice if—
(a) he or she is a national of a relevant state and satisfies the
Council as to one of the requirements set out in subsec-
tions (3) to(5),o r
(b) he or she has, in a third country received such training and
education, passed such examinations and obtained suchqualifications as are, in the opinion of the Council, of astandard not lower than the standard of those necessaryfor practice in the State.
(3) The first of the requirements referred to in subsection (2)(a)
is that the person holds a diploma, certificate or other evidence offormal qualification in pharmacy awarded after training in accord-ance with Article 44 of the Professional Qualifications Directive andreferred to in Annex V, point 5.6.2 to that Directive.
(4) The second of those requirements is that the person holds evi-
dence of the formal qualifications as a pharmacist referred to inArticle 23 of the Professional Qualifications Directive and is a personin respect of whom a certificate has been issued by a competentauthority stating that he or she has been effectively and lawfullyengaged in the activities of a pharmacist for at least 3 consecutiveyears during the 5 years before the issue of the certificate.
(5) The third of those requirements is that the person—
(a) holds a diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal
qualification as a pharmacist granted by a competentauthority of a third country, and the diploma, certificateor other evidence has been recognised by a relevant statefor the purpose of being a pharmacist in that state, and[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) has experience, of at least three years, of practising as a
pharmacist in that state certified in accordance withArticle 3.3 of the Professional Qualifications Directive.
(6) The Council may—
(a) so as to inform itself for the purposes of subsection (2)(b)
about the standard of training, education, examinationsand qualifications in another state, require a person towhom that provision appears to apply to sit anexamination,
(b) in any case in which it is in any doubt about a matter
referred to in that provision, require a person to whomthat provision appears to apply to undergo such trainingas it may specify.
(7) Schedule 2 makes further provision as to the recognition of
professional qualifications in pharmacy.
(8) In this section—
“competent authority” means, in relation to a relevant state, the
authority designated in accordance with Article 56.3 of the Pro-fessional Qualifications Directive;
“Professional Qualifications Directive” means Directive 2005/36/EC
of 7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional qualificationsas amended by Council Directive 2006/100/EC of 20 November 2006adapting certain Directives in the field of freedom of movement ofpersons by reason of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania;
“relevant state” means—
(a) a Member State (other than the State),
(b) a state that is a contracting state to the EEA Agreement
within the meaning given by the European Communities(Amendment) Act 1993 (other than a Member State orthe State),
(c) the Swiss Confederation;
“third country” means a country that is not a relevant state or the
State.
(9) An expression used in this section and also in the Professional
Qualifications Directive has the same meaning in this section as ithas in that Directive.
17.—(1) The Council shall register a retail pharmacy business in
the retail pharmacy businesses’ register if the applicant forregistration—
(a) is the pharmacy owner,
(b) specifies in the application the address of the premises in
which the business is being or is to be carried on and thename under which it is being or is to be carried on andotherwise meets the prescribed requirements for theapplication,
19Pt.4 S.16
Procedure and
criteria forregistration of retailpharmacybusinesses.Pt.4 S.17
Regulation of retail
pharmacybusinesses.
20[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(c) specifies in the application the name of the registered
pharmacist who is or is to be in whole-time charge of thecarrying on of the business there,
(d) complies with any requirement of the Council to—
(i) verify anything contained in the application,
(ii) supply further information in relation to the
application,
(iii) make a statutory declaration supplying that
information,
(e) pays the prescribed fee to the Council,
(f) satisfies the Council that the retail pharmacy business will
be conducted in accordance with regulations undersection 18 .
(2) Where a pharmacy owner carries on business as such in two
or more premises, each of those premises shall, for the purposes ofsubsection (1) , be regarded as separate premises in which a retail
pharmacy business is being or is to be carried on.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2)apply also in respect of the continued
registration of a retail pharmacy business.
(4) A change in the ownership of a retail pharmacy business shall
have the effect of cancelling its registration.
(5) The cancellation of the registration of a retail pharmacy busi-
ness under subsection (4) shall take effect—
(a) in the case of a change in ownership brought about by the
death of an owner or joint owner, at the end of the periodof three months beginning with the date of the death, and
(b) in any other case, at the end of the period of 28 days begin-
ning with the date of the change in ownership.
(6) In subsection (4) , a “change in the ownership of a
pharmacy”—
(a) in the case of a pharmacy which is owned by two or more
persons, includes a change of one of the co-owners,
(b) in the case of a pharmacy which is not so owned, includes
a change which results in its being so owned, and
(c) in the case of a pharmacy which is owned by a company,
includes the acquisition or disposal in one transaction orin a series of transactions of shares amounting in value tomore than half of those issued by the company.
18.—(1) The Minister may, for the purposes of the health, safety
and convenience of the public, make regulations about all or any ofthe following matters in respect of retail pharmacy businesses:
(a) the manner in which medicinal products are prepared
there;[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) the supervision of those processes there;
(c) the physical characteristics of that part of the premises
which is to be provided for the conduct of those pro-cesses, including the separation of that part from the restof the premises;
(d) the facilities to be provided for the conduct of those
processes;
(e) the physical characteristics of the part of the premises
which is to be used for the storage of medicinal products;
(f) the conditions, (including those relating to temperature,
humidity, cleanliness and sanitation) in which medicinalproducts are prepared, stored, sold, supplied and dis-pensed there;
(g) the precautions to be taken before medicinal products are
sold or supplied there;
(h) the disposal of medicinal products;
(i) the manner in which medicinal products are to be sold or
supplied there;
(j) the physical characteristics of that part of the premises
which is to be provided for members of the public beingsold or supplied with medicinal products or to whommedical prescriptions are being dispensed, and the facili-ties within that part;
(k) the facilities to be provided and arrangements made there
to enable the review, if necessary in private, of the med-icinal treatment of a person to whom medicinal productsare being or might be sold or supplied and the coun-selling, if necessary in private, of that person in connec-tion with that treatment;
(l) the keeping of records of and in connection with the sale
and supply of medicinal products and the dispensing ofmedical prescriptions;
(m) the retention, custody, transfer and disposal of those
records following the cessation or transfer of the retailpharmacy business;
(n) the use and condition of any apparatus, equipment, utensil
or furnishing used for or in connection with the carryingon of the retail pharmacy business;
(o) the safe keeping of medicinal products there.
(2) In subsection (1) , “medicinal product” includes veterinary
medicinal products within the meaning of Directive 2001/82/EC ofthe European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 asamended by Directive 2004/28/EC of the European Parliament andof the Council of 31 March 2004.
(3) A person who contravenes a relevant provision shall be guilty
of an offence.
21Pt.4 S.18Pt.4 S.18
Inspection of
premises of retailpharmacy businessfor the purposes ofsection 18 .
Certificate of
registration.
Refusal to register:
notification andappeal.
22[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(4) In subsection (3) , a “relevant provision” is any provision of
regulations made under this section designated as such in theregulations.
19.—(1) In any case where the Council considers that it is appro-
priate, it may cause an authorised officer to inspect the premises ofa retail pharmacy business in respect of which an application forregistration or continued registration has been made to ascertain ifthey comply with any regulations made by the Minister undersection 18 .
(2) An authorised officer shall, as soon as practicable after the
inspection furnish a written report to the Council, and a copy of thewritten report to the applicant.
20.—(1) As soon as practicable, the Council shall issue a certifi-
cate of registration to—
(a) a pharmacist who has, or
(b) a pharmacy owner whose retail pharmacy business has,
been registered or restored to a register.
(2) On continuing the registration of a registered pharmacist or
registered retail pharmacy business, the Council shall issue a certifi-cate of continued registration to the registered pharmacist or as thecase may be the owner of the registered retail pharmacy business.
(3) A certificate of registration is current for the period of 12
months from the date of registration or restoration.
(4) A certificate of continued registration is current for the period
of 12 months beginning with the day following the date of expiry ofthe immediately preceding certificate.
(5) A person who gives to another person a certificate issued to
him or her under this section, with the intention that it be used toinduce a third person to accept it as relating to that other person orwho, with that intention, permits that other person to use the certifi-cate, commits an offence.
(6) A person to whom a certificate has been issued under this
section and who ceases to be registered within the currency of thecertificate shall return it to the registrar within 14 days of thecessation.
21.—(1) If the Council refuses an application for registration, it
shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision, the reason for itand the date when it was made.
(2) An applicant whose application for registration under this Act
is refused by the Council, may appeal to the High Court against therefusal within a period of 3 months beginning on the date of receiptof notification under subsection (1) .
(3) On an appeal under this section, the High Court may make—
(a) an order affirming the refusal,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) an order setting it aside and requiring the Council to pro-
ceed with the registration,
(c) an order (with or without directions) remitting the appli-
cation to the Council for reconsideration and the makingof a new decision, or
(d) any other order that it considers appropriate.
22.—(1) It is the duty of the Council to ensure that the registers
are accurate.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) the
Council shall—
(a) make any alteration requiring to be made in the infor-
mation contained in an entry,
(b) correct typographical and similar errors.
(3) The Council shall, as soon as practicable after doing anything
under subsections (1) and (2), give notice in writing of that fact to
the person to whom the cancellation, correction or other changerelates or, as the case may be, that person’s next of kin.
(4) A person to whom an entry in a register relates shall notify
the Council in writing of—
(a) any error that the person knows of in that entry, or
(b) any change of circumstances that is likely to have a bearing
on the accuracy of the entry,
as soon as may be after the person becomes aware of that error or
change in circumstances.
23.—In any legal proceedings—
(a) a document signed by the registrar stating—
(i) what is or is not registered,
(ii) what was or was not registered and when,
is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of
the matters stated,
(b) a printed document—
(i) appearing to be a copy of any part of or an extract
from a register, and
(ii) bearing a signed statement by the registrar that it is
such a copy or extract,
is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of
the content of so much of the register that is copied orextracted,
23Pt.4 S.21
Maintenance and
correction ofregisters.
Evidence as to the
registers.Pt.4 S.23
Roll of pharmacy
students.
Interpretation of
Part 5 .
24[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(c) a signature appearing to be the registrar’s on any such
document is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,to be taken as being the registrar’s.
24.—(1) The Council may set up and maintain a roll of persons
who are studying pharmacy in the schools of pharmacy of third leveleducational establishments in the State (but the fact that a personstudying pharmacy there is not or has not been enrolled, shall haveno effect on his or her eligibility to be awarded a qualification or tobe registered).
(2) No fee shall be payable in respect of any enrolment under
subsection (1) .
PART 5
Offences
25.—(1) This section has effect for the purposes of the interpreta-
tion of Part 5 .
(2) In Part 5 —
“3 year minimum post-registration experience” means experience of
at least 3 years of—
(a) practising whole-time as a registered pharmacist—
(i) in a retail pharmacy business,
(ii) before the commencement of this Act, in a shop kept
open for the dispensing or compounding of medicalprescriptions and the sale of poisons, or
(iii) in a combination of both,
or
(b) practising whole-time as a pharmacist outside the State in
a business corresponding to a retail pharmacy businesson foot of a qualification which was (or could have been)the qualification appropriate for practice by reference towhich he or she has registered under this Act, or
(c) any combination of the types of experience set out in para-
graphs (a) and (b);
“representative” means—
(a) in relation to a pharmacist who has died—
(i) his or her executor or administrator, or
(ii) where the pharmacist has died without an executor
entitled and willing to carry on the retail pharmacybusiness and the person beneficially interested in theestate has (or, if there are two or more persons sointerested, each has or all have jointly), within aperiod of 3 months after the death, nominated a rep-resentative to carry on the business pending the[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
appointment of an administrator, the representative
so nominated,
(b) in relation to a pharmacist who has been adjudicated
bankrupt, the official assignee in bankruptcy,
(c) in relation to a pharmacist who is a ward of court and in
respect of whom a committee has been appointed, thecommittee,
(d) in relation to a pharmacist who is under a mental inca-
pacity and in respect of whom an enduring power ofattorney has been registered, the attorney.
26.—(1) A person carries on a retail pharmacy business in accord-
ance with this section if the retail pharmacy business is registeredand—
(a) where the business is carried on by a natural person or by
a partnership, the conditions set out in section 27 are met,
(b) where the business is carried on by a corporate body, the
conditions set out in section 28 are met,
(c) where the business is carried on by a representative of a
registered pharmacist, the conditions set out in section 29
are met.
(2) A person who carries on a retail pharmacy business otherwise
than in accordance with this section commits an offence.
27.—The conditions referred to in section 26(1)(a) are—
(a) that the person referred to in section 26(1)(a) is a regis-
tered pharmacist or the partnership there referred to con-sists only of registered pharmacists,
(b) that the part of the business that consists of the manage-
ment and administration of the sale and supply of med-icinal products is under the personal control of a regis-tered pharmacist who has a 3 years minimum post-registration experience,
(c) that, at the premises where the business is carried on, or,
if there are two or more of those premises, at each ofthem, there is a registered pharmacist who ha s a 3 years
minimum post-registration experience in whole-timecharge of the carrying on of the business there,
(d) that the sale and supply of medicinal products in the prem-
ises in which the business is carried on is conducted inthose premises or, as the case may be, in each of them,by or under the personal supervision of a registeredpharmacist,
(e) that the name and certificate of registration of the regis-
tered pharmacist referred to in paragraph (c) and the cer-
tificate of registration of the business are conspicuouslydisplayed at the premises in which the business is carriedon or, as the case may be, at each of those premises.
25Pt.5 S.25
Conduct of retail
pharmacy business:offences.
Carrying on of
retail pharmacybusiness by naturalperson orpartnership.Pt.5
Carrying on of
retail pharmacybusiness bycorporate body.
Carrying on of
retail pharmacybusiness byrepresentative.
26[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
28.—The conditions referred to in section 26(1)(b) are—
(a) that the part of the business that consists of the manage-
ment and administration of the sale and supply of med-icinal products is under the personal control of a regis-tered pharmacist who ha s a 3 year minimum post-
registration experience and who has provided the regis-trar with a statement—
(i) specifying the name of the pharmacist and declaring
whether he or she is a director of the corporate bodyor office holder in the other body referred to insection 26(1)(b) , and
(ii) signed by the pharmacist and on behalf of the corpor-
ate body or other body,
(b) that, at the premises where the business is carried on or,
if there are two or more of those premises, at each ofthem, there is a registered pharmacist who ha s a 3 years
minimum post-registration experience in whole-timecharge of the carrying on of the business there,
(c) the sale and supply of medicinal products in the premises
in which the business is carried on is conducted in thosepremises or, as the case may be, in each of them by orunder the personal supervision of a registeredpharmacist,
(d) the name and certificate of registration of the pharmacist
referred to in paragraph (b) and the certificate of regis-
tration of the business are conspicuously displayed at thepremises at which the business is carried on or, as thecase may be, at each of them.
29.—The conditions referred to in section 26(1)(c) are—
(a) that the registrar has been notified of the name and
address of the representative and of the pharmacist ofwhom he or she is a representative,
(b) that the part of the business that consists of the manage-
ment and administration of the sale and supply of med-icinal products is under the personal control of a regis-tered pharmacist who ha s a 3 year minimum post-
registration experience,
(c) that, at the premises where the business is carried on or,
if there are two or more of those premises, at each ofthem, there is a registered pharmacist who ha s a 3 years
minimum post-registration experience in whole-timecharge of the carrying on of the business there,
(d) that the sale and supply of medicinal products in the prem-
ises in which the business is carried on is conducted inthose premises or, as the case may be, in each of them byor under the personal supervision of a registeredpharmacist,
(e) that the name and certificate of registration of the pharma-
cist referred to in paragraph (c) and the certificate of
registration of the business are conspicuously displayed[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
at the premises where the business is carried on or, as the
case may be, at each of them,
(f) that—
(i) in the case where the event that gave rise to the
appointment of the representative was the death ofthe registered pharmacist referred to in section
26(1)(c) , not more than 5 years has elapsed since that
death, and
(ii) in any other case, not more than 3 years has elapsed
since that event.
30.—(1) No offence is committed under section 26 where a regis-
tered pharmaceutical assistant acts on behalf of a registered pharma-cist during the temporary absence of the registered pharmacist.
(2) Rules made by the Council with the consent of the Minister
may, for the purposes of subsection (1) , provide further as to—
(a) what may or may not be done by a registered pharmaceut-
ical assistant when acting on behalf of a registeredpharmacist,
(b) what constitutes the temporary absence of a registered
pharmacist.
31.—(1) A person, other than—
(a) a registered pharmacist, or
(b) a registered pharmaceutical assistant,
who knowingly provides skilled assistance to a registered pharmacist
shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) A registered pharmacist who accepts skilled assistance from a
person whom he knows or ought to know is not a registered pharma-cist or a registered pharmaceutical assistant shall be guilty of anoffence.
(3) Providing or accepting skilled assistance shall not be an
offence under this section if it is done as part of the training or edu-cation of a person as a pharmacist or in an activity ancillary topharmacy.
(4) In this section, “skilled assistance” is any assistance which con-
sists of or includes or should consist of or include the exercise of theknowledge, ability, judgment and other qualities necessary of a per-son who is a pharmacist or a pharmaceutical assistant, including theexercise of that knowledge, ability and judgment and those otherqualities by way of the supervision of others.
32.—(1) A person other than a registered pharmacist who holds
himself or herself out as a registered pharmacist shall be guilty ofan offence.
(2) A person other than a registered druggist who holds himself
or herself out as a registered druggist shall be guilty of an offence.
27Pt.5 S.29
Saving for
temporary cover bypharmaceuticalassistant.
Offence of
providing skilledpharmaceuticalassistance byunregistered person.
Offence of holding
oneself out asregisteredpharmacist orregistered druggist.Pt.5 S.32
28[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(3) A person other than a registered retail pharmacy business who
holds himself, herself or itself out as a registered retail pharmacybusiness shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) A person, other than a registered pharmacist, who—
(a) publicly describes himself or herself as a “pharmacist”, a
“dispensing chemist”, a “pharmaceutical chemist”(whether or not with the addition of the word“registered”) or a “Member of the PharmaceuticalSociety of Ireland” or “MPSI” or, in any public descrip-tion of himself or herself, uses an expression mentionedinsubsection (6) ,
(b) uses any emblem or device from which the public might
reasonably infer that he or she is a registered pharma-cist, or
(c) causes or permits such a public description or use to occur,
is, without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) ,t ob e
regarded as holding himself or herself out as a registered pharmacist.
(5) A person, other than a registered druggist or registered phar-
macist, who—
(a) publicly describes himself or herself as a “druggist”, a
“chemist and druggist” (whether or not with the additionof the word “registered”) or, in any public description ofhimself or herself uses an expression mentioned in sub-
section (6) ,
(b) uses any emblem or device from which the public might
reasonably infer that he or she is a registered druggist, or
(c) causes or permits such a public description or use to occur,
is, without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) to be
regarded as holding himself or herself out to be a registered druggist.
(6) The expressions referred to in subsections (4) and (5)are—
(a) pharmacy,
(b) medical stores,
(c) drug stores,
(d) drug hall,
(e) medical supply stores,
(f) medical hall,
(g) chemist.
(7) A person does not commit an offence under this section by
using, in a public description of a registered retail pharmacy business,an expression mentioned in subsection (6) .[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
PART 6
Complaints, Inquiries and Discipline
33.—In this Part—
“committee of inquiry” means a health committee or a professional
conduct committee;
“complaint” means a complaint made under section 35 or36;
“disciplinary committee” means a committee established under
section 34(1) ;
“disciplinary sanction” means a sanction specified in any paragraph
ofsection 48(1) ;
“health committee” means a committee established under section
34(1)(c) ;
“poor professional performance”, in relation to a registered pharma-
cist, means any failure of the registered pharmacist to meet the stan-dards of competence that may be reasonably expected of a regis-tered pharmacist;
“preliminary proceedings committee” means a committee estab-
lished under section 34(1)(a) ;
“professional conduct committee” means a committee established
under section 34(1)(b) ;
“professional misconduct”, in relation to a registered pharmacist,
means any act, omission or pattern of conduct that—
(a) is a breach of the code of conduct for registered
pharmacists,
(b) is infamous or disgraceful in a professional respect
(notwithstanding that, if the same or like act, omission orpattern of conduct were committed by a member ofanother profession, it would not be professional miscon-duct in respect of that profession),
(c) involves moral turpitude, fraud or dishonesty of a nature
or degree which bears on the carrying on of the pro-fession of a pharmacist, or
(d) if the registered pharmacist has been granted a licence,
certificate or registration by a body outside the Staterelating to the practice of pharmacy is a breach of a stan-dard of conduct, performance or ethics that—
(i) applies to a person holding that licence, certificate or
registration, and
(ii) corresponds to a standard contained in the code
referred to in paragraph (a) or a standard breach of
which amounts to conduct of the kind mentioned inparagraphs (b) or(c),
but does not include an act, omission or pattern of conduct that con-
sists of a wrongly but honestly formed professional judgment;
29Interpretation of
Part 6 .Pt.6 S.33
Disciplinary
committees.
Complaints about
registeredpharmacists.
30[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
“registered” in relation to a complaint against a pharmacist or retail
pharmacy business includes a pharmacist or retail pharmacy businesswhich was registered at the time when the circumstances constitutingthe grounds of the complaint occurred although not registered whenthe complaint is made or later.
34.—(1) The Council shall establish the following disciplinary
committees:
(a) a preliminary proceedings committee;
(b) a professional conduct committee;
(c) a health committee.
(2) The President of the Society is not eligible to be appointed to
a disciplinary committee.
(3) A majority of the members of a disciplinary committee shall
be persons other than registered pharmacists and at least one ofthose persons shall be appointed to represent the interest of thepublic.
(4) At least one third of its members shall be registered
pharmacists.
(5) At least 2 of its members shall be registered pharmacists who
are pharmacy owners.
(6) The quorum of a disciplinary committee considering a com-
plaint against a pharmacy owner shall include at least one registeredpharmacist who is a pharmacy owner.
(7) A person is not eligible to hold concurrent membership of
more than one disciplinary committee.
(8) The members of a disciplinary committee have, as such, the
same protections and immunities as a judge of the High Court.
(9) The Council shall appoint a registered medical practitioner
with relevant expertise to advise the health committee in relation toeach complaint referred to it.
(10) The registered medical practitioner must be present at the
meetings of that committee, but may not vote.
(11) The registered medical practitioner has, when advising that
committee, the same protections and immunities as a judge of theHigh Court.
35.—(1) This section applies to a complaint made to the Council
about a registered pharmacist on the grounds of—
(a) professional misconduct within or outside the State,
(b) poor professional performance within or outside the State,
(c) impairment of the registered pharmacist’s ability to prac-
tise because of a physical or mental ailment, an emotionaldisturbance or an addiction to alcohol or drugs,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(d) a failure to comply with a condition of registration,
(e) a failure to comply with an undertaking or to take any
action specified in a consent given in response to arequest under section 46 ,
(f) a contravention of this Act or rules made by the Council
under this Act, or
(g) a conviction in the State for an offence triable on indict-
ment or a conviction outside the State for an offence con-sisting of an act or omission that, if done or made in theState, would constitute an offence triable on indictment.
(2) A complaint must be in writing or, if not, in a form acceptable
to the Council.
(3) A complaint may be made by or on behalf of any person or
by the registrar.
(4) The Council shall inform the registered pharmacist about
whom a complaint has been made of that fact and give the registeredpharmacist a copy of the complaint.
(5) The Council shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the
complainant and the registered pharmacist are kept informed of themaking of all decisions by it in relation to a complaint.
(6) The Council shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that a
complaint is processed in a timely manner.
36.—(1) This section applies in relation to a complaint made to
the Council about a registered retail pharmacy business on thegrounds that—
(a) the pharmacy owner or an employee or partner of the
pharmacy owner has been convicted of an offence underthis Act, any Act repealed by this Act, or regulationsmade under this Act or that Act, the Misuse of DrugsActs 1977 to 2006, the Irish Medicines Board Acts 1995and 2006, the Poisons Acts 1961 and 1977 or the AnimalRemedies Acts 1993 and 2006, or
(b) the pharmacy owner or an employee or a partner of the
pharmacy owner has been convicted of any other offenceor has committed misconduct and the nature of thatoffence or misconduct is such that, were the personapplying to the Council for registration as a pharmacist,the Council would be likely to refuse to register theperson,
(c) in a case where the business has been carried on as men-
tioned in sections 26 and 29by a representative, the rep-
resentative or any person engaged by the representativein connection with the carrying on of the pharmacy(whether or not for the purposes of section 29 ) has—
(i) been convicted of an offence mentioned in paragraph
(a),o r
31Pt.6 S.35
Complaints about
registered retailpharmacybusinesses.Pt.6 S.36
Mediation of
complaints.
32[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(ii) been convicted of an offence or committed miscon-
duct the nature of which is as mentioned in para-
graph (b) .
(2) Subsections (2) to(6)ofsection 35 shall apply to a complaint
about a registered retail pharmacy business as they apply to a com-plaint about a registered pharmacist but with the substitution forreferences to the registered pharmacist of references to the pharmacyowner or, as the case may be, the representative of that owner.
(3) In subsection (1) , the references to a pharmacy owner include
references to a director of a corporate body which owns the retailpharmacy business.
37.—(1) The Council may devise guidelines about resolving com-
plaints by mediation.
(2) The guidelines may include provision about—
(a) determining, having regard to the public interest, whether
a complaint might be satisfactorily resolved by mediationor warrants the holding of an inquiry,
(b) the persons who may mediate (“mediators”),
(c) the recording of the manner in which the complaint is
resolved and of the agreement of the complainant andthe registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner to theresolution,
(d) the steps to be taken (including notice to the complainant,
the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner and thepreliminary proceedings committee) if the complaintcannot, in the opinion of the mediator, be resolved bymediation,
(e) any other matters that the Council considers necessary or
appropriate for facilitating the resolution of a complaintby mediation.
(3) No attempt may be made to resolve a complaint by mediation
without the consent of the complainant and the registered pharmacistor pharmacy owner.
(4) Consent given for the purposes of subsection (3) by a regis-
tered pharmacist or pharmacy owner shall not be taken as an admis-sion of any allegation made by the complainant.
(5) The mediator shall report the terms of resolution of a com-
plaint by mediation to the Council.
(6) Where the terms of resolution of a complaint consist of or
include an outcome corresponding to one or more of the disciplinarysanctions set out in subsection (1)(b) ofsection 48 , the Council may
impose that or those sanctions as if under that section.
(7) No answer or statement made by the complainant or by the
registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner in the course of mediationmay be—
(a) communicated to any person other than those participat-
ing in the mediation, or[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) used in any disciplinary, civil or criminal proceedings.
(8) The Council may revise any guidelines devised under this
section.
(9) In this section, “mediation” includes other informal means of
resolving complaints.
38.—(1) As soon as practicable after receiving a complaint, the
Council shall refer it to the preliminary proceedings committee forits advice on whether there is sufficient cause to warrant furtheraction being taken.
(2) The committee may—
(a) require the complainant to verify, by affidavit or other-
wise, anything contained in the complaint,
(b) require the complainant to give, by statutory declaration
or otherwise, more information relating to the matterraised by the complaint,
(c) require the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner to
give such information in relation to the complaint as thecommittee specifies,
(d) invite the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner to
submit observations.
(3) A requirement under subsection (2) —
(a) must be in writing,
(b) must specify a reasonable time within which it is to be met,
(c) may be made along with or after another such
requirement.
(4) The registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner may give the
committee information although not required to do so and submitobservations although not invited to do so.
(5) Before arriving at its advice on whether there is sufficient
cause to warrant further action, the committee shall consider—
(a) any information given under this section, and
(b) whether the complaint is trivial, vexatious, or made in
bad faith.
39.—(1) On receiving advice pursuant to section 38 , the Council
shall decide whether to take further action.
(2) If the Council decides to take no further action, it shall inform
the registered pharmacist or the pharmacy owner, the preliminaryproceedings committee and the complainant accordingly.
33Pt.6 S.37
Reference of
complaints topreliminaryproceedingscommittee foradvice.
Action by Council
on advice for nofurther action.Pt.6
Procedure following
recommendationfor, or decision totake, further action.
Notification of
referral ofcomplaint tocommittee ofinquiry and ofhearing.
Hearings:
procedure.
34[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
40.—(1) If the preliminary proceedings committee advises, pursu-
ant to section 38 , that there is sufficient cause to warrant further
action or the Council decides, under section 39 , to take further
action, the committee shall either—
(a) refer the complaint for resolution by mediation under
section 37 ,o r
(b) refer the complaint to whichever of the following commit-
tees (“committees of inquiry”) it considers appropriate—
(i) the professional conduct committee,
(ii) the health committee.
(2) If informed by a mediator that a complaint referred for resol-
ution by mediation—
(a) cannot be so resolved,
(b) can be so resolved but only after taking into account con-
siderations which make the complaint more suitable fora committee of inquiry,
the committee shall refer the complaint to a committee of inquiry as
if under subsection (1)(b) .
41.—(1) As soon as practicable after a complaint is referred to a
committee of inquiry, the committee shall notify the registered phar-macist or pharmacy owner in writing of—
(a) the referral of the complaint and the name of the
committee,
(b) the subject matter of the complaint, including the part-
iculars of any evidence provided in support of the com-plaint, and
(c) the entitlement of the registered pharmacist or pharmacy
owner, and his or her representative, to attend the com-mittee and to be heard.
(2) After notifying the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner
under subsection (1) the committee shall arrange a hearing and fix a
date, time and place for it.
(3) Not later than 30 days before the date of a hearing, the com-
mittee shall notify the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner andthe complainant in writing of the date, time and place of the hearing.
42.—(1) A hearing before the professional conduct committee
shall be held in public.
(2) But it shall be held in private if—
(a) the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner or the com-
plainant so requests, and
(b) the committee is satisfied that it would be appropriate to
agree to that request.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(3) A hearing before the health committee shall be held in
private.
(4) But it shall be held in public if—
(a) the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner or the com-
plainant so requests, and
(b) the committee is satisfied that it would be appropriate to
agree to that request.
(5) At a hearing before a committee of inquiry—
(a) any person, with leave of the committee, may lead the evi-
dence in support of the complaint,
(b) the testimony of witnesses shall be given on oath or affir-
mation, and
(c) there shall be a full right to cross-examine witnesses and
call evidence in defence and reply.
(6) Any member of a committee of inquiry may administer oaths.(7) A committee of inquiry may transfer a complaint to the other
committee of inquiry before or after hearing any evidence relatingto the complaint, but only if both committees are satisfied that—
(a) the nature of the complaint makes it appropriate to do
so, and
(b) the registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner will not be
prejudiced.
(8) A committee of inquiry to which a complaint is so
transferred—
(a) may receive in evidence a transcript of evidence taken
before the other committee of inquiry and draw con-clusions of fact from the evidence,
(b) if it considers it necessary in the interests of fairness to
rehear any evidence taken before the other committee ofinquiry, shall do so.
43.—(1) A committee of inquiry shall have all the powers, rights,
privileges and duties of the Court or a judge of the Court thatrelate to—
(a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses,
(b) examining witnesses on oath or otherwise,
(c) compelling the production or inspection of records or
other documents or property, and
(d) awarding and authorising the recovery of costs.
(2) The chair, or any other member of a committee of inquiry
who has been authorised for the purpose by the Council, may issuea summons for the purposes of exercising and performing the
35Pt.6 S.42
Hearings: evidence,
powers, immunities,offences, etc.Pt.6 S.43
36[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
powers, rights, privileges and duties referred to in subsections (1)(a)
and (c).
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit the generality of subsection (1) .
(4) Subject to any rules under section 11 and to the necessity of
observing fair procedures, a committee of inquiry may receive evi-dence given—
(a) orally before the committee,
(b) by statutory declaration,
(c) as otherwise allowed by those rules, including by means of
a live-video link, or any other mode of transmission.
(5) A witness before a committee of inquiry shall have the same
immunities and privileges as a witness before the Court.
(6) An award of costs under subsection (1)(d) may, within 21 days
of its having been made, be appealed to the District Court for thetime being assigned to the district where the committee awarding thecosts sat when doing so.
(7) A person shall be guilty of an offence if he or she—
(a) having been summoned to attend before a committee of
inquiry, fails without reasonable excuse to attend,
(b) without reasonable excuse, refuses to—
(i) take an oath or make an affirmation,
(ii) produce or allow inspection of any record or other
document or property in his or her possession orcontrol that he or she is required to produce, orallow to be inspected, or
(iii) answer any question that he or she is lawfully required
to answer,
or
(c) does anything that, if the committee were a court of law,
would be contempt of court.
(8) On a failure or refusal of a kind mentioned in subsection (7)(a)
or(b), the Court, on application by the Council, may—
(a) order the person to attend before the committee,
(b) order the person to do the thing that he or she refused
to do,
(c) make such interim or interlocutory orders as it considers
necessary,
(d) authorise the award of costs.
(9) An application for the making of an order under subsection
(8)does not preclude proceedings for an offence under subsection
(7)(a) or(b).[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(10) In this section “Court” means the High Court.
44.—If a complaint is withdrawn, the committee considering it
may, with the Council’s agreement—
(a) decide that no further action is to be taken, or
(b) proceed as if the complaint had not been withdrawn.
45.—(1) The High Court, on application by the Council, may by
order suspend the registration of a registered pharmacist or regis-tered retail pharmacy business against whom a complaint has beenmade.
(2) An order under subsection (1) suspending the registration of
a retail pharmacy business may also provide for the closure of thepremises in which the business has been carried on.
(3) The High Court shall not make an order under subsection (1)
unless satisfied that the Council has notified the registered pharma-cist or, as the case may be, the pharmacy owner of its intention toapply for an order.
(4) An order under subsection (1) may be made only if the High
Court considers that there is a risk to the health and safety of thepublic which is of such magnitude that the pharmacist’s or pharmacyretail business’ registration should be suspended pending further pro-cedure under this Part and, in the case of an order containing a clos-ure provision under subsection (2) , that the premises there referred
to should be closed pending that procedure.
(5) An application under this section shall be heard in private,
unless the High Court, on a request by the registered pharmacist orthe pharmacy owner that it be heard in public, considers that itshould be so heard.
46.—(1) A committee of inquiry may, in dealing with a complaint,
request the registered pharmacist or the pharmacy owner to do oneor more of the following as appropriate—
(a) to undertake not to repeat the conduct to which the com-
plaint relates,
(b) to undertake to attend specified educational courses, train-
ing or other means of improving his or her competenceto practise or to carry on a retail pharmacy business,
(c) to consent to undergo medical treatment,
(d) to consent to being admonished or censured by the
Council.
(2) If a registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner refuses to give
an undertaking or consent so requested, the committee of inquirymay proceed as if the request had not been made.
47.—(1) On completing an inquiry, a committee of inquiry shall
make a written report to the Council.
37Pt.6 S.43
Procedure following
withdrawal ofcomplaint.
Interim suspension
of registration.
Undertaking and
consents.
Committee’s
inquiry report.Pt.6 S.47
Action by Council
on report bydisciplinarycommittee.
Notification of
imposition ofdisciplinarysanction.
38[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(2) The report shall specify the subject matter of the complaint,
the evidence presented and the committee’s findings.
(3) The report may include such additional matters as the commit-
tee considers appropriate.
48.—(1) Within 30 days after considering the report, the Council
shall—
(a) if the committee finds that the complaint is not substan-
tiated, dismiss the complaint, or
(b) if the committee finds that the complaint is substantiated,
impose one or more of the following disciplinary sanc-tions on the registered pharmacist or the pharmacyowner—
(i) an admonishment or a censure,
(ii) the attachment of conditions to the registration of the
pharmacist or retail pharmacy business, which mayinclude restrictions on practice or, as the case maybe, the carrying on of the business,
(iii) the suspension of the registration for a specified
period,
(iv) the cancellation of the registration,
(v) a prohibition for a specified period on applying for
restoration to the register.
(2) The Council may not cancel the registration of a pharmacist
or retail pharmacy business on the grounds of a conviction for anoffence unless in the Council’s opinion, the nature of the offence orthe circumstances in which it was committed are such that, were thepharmacist or pharmacy owner applying for registration, the Councilwould refuse the registration.
49.—(1) As soon as practicable after deciding to impose a dis-
ciplinary sanction, the Council shall notify the registered pharmacistor pharmacy owner and the complainant of the following—
(a) the disciplinary sanction imposed,
(b) the reasons for the imposition of the sanction,
(c) the date of the decision.
(2) If the Council has imposed a disciplinary sanction other than
an admonishment or a censure, the notification under subsection (1)
must also specify—
(a) the time within which the registered pharmacist or phar-
macy owner may apply to the High Court for cancellationof the decision, and
(b) the time within which the Council may apply to the High
Court for confirmation of the decision.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
50.—A decision under section 48 to impose a disciplinary sanction
(other than an admonishment or a censure) does not take effectunless and until it is confirmed by the High Court on applicationunder section 51 or52.
51.—(1) The High Court may, on application by a registered phar-
macist or pharmacy owner on whom the Council has imposed a dis-ciplinary sanction (other than an admonishment or a censure), orderits cancellation.
(2) The application must be made within 30 days after receipt of
the notification of the decision from the Council.
(3) The High Court may consider any evidence adduced or argu-
ment made to it, whether or not adduced or made to a committeeof inquiry.
(4) The High Court may, on an application for an order under
subsection (1) —
(a) make any other order it considers just, including an order
confirming or modifying the decision, and
(b) give the Council any direction.
52.—(1) If no application under section 51 is made within the
period referred to in subsection (2) of that section, the Council shall
apply to the High Court for an order confirming the decision.
(2) An application under this section must be made within 60 days
of the registered pharmacist’s or pharmacy owner’s receipt of notifi-cation of the decision.
(3) The High Court may but need not confirm the Council’s
decision.
(4) A suspension of registration confirmed under this section may
not begin in the 7 days following the making of the order.
53.—On an application under section 51 or52, the High Court may
hear evidence from any person of good standing within the pro-fession of pharmacy as to what constitutes poor professional per-formance or professional misconduct in that profession.
54.—The decision of the High Court on an application under
section 51 or52is final except that, by leave of the High Court or
the Supreme Court, the Council or the pharmacist or pharmacyowner may appeal that decision to the Supreme Court on a questionof law of public importance.
55.—The Council shall notify the pharmacist or pharmacy owner,
in writing, of the effect of the decision of the High Court undersection 51 or52.
56.—(1) The Council shall notify the Minister as soon as practi-
cable of—
39Pt.6
Disciplinary
sanction to beconfirmed by HighCourt.
High Court’s power
to cancel, etc.,disciplinarysanction.
Confirmation by
High Court ofdisciplinarysanction.
Expert evidence on
poor professionalperformance andprofessionalmisconduct.
Finality of decision
of High Court.
Notification of
decision of HighCourt.
Notification of
sanctions, etc., toMinister.Pt.6 S.56
Public notice of
sanctions, etc.
40[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(a) the cancellation of a registration,
(b) the restoration of a registration,
(c) the suspension of a registration,
(d) the expiry of a suspension,
(e) the attachment of conditions to a registration,
(f) the removal of conditions from a registration,
(g) the prohibition for a specified period of a pharmacist or
pharmacy owner from applying for restoration to theregister,
(h) the admonishment or censure of a registered pharmacist
or pharmacy owner.
(2) If it comes to the Council’s attention that, under the law of a
state other than the State, any action corresponding to one referredto in subsection (1) has been taken in relation to a pharmacist, retail
pharmacy business or pharmacy owner, the Council shall notify theMinister of that fact.
(3) If, in the case of a pharmacist who is an employee—
(a) the Court or the Council has taken any action specified in
subsection (1) ,o r
(b) it has come to the Council’s attention that any correspond-
ing action of the kind referred to in subsection (2) has
been taken in respect of the pharmacist,
and the Council knows who the employer of the pharmacist is, it
shall notify the employer of that fact.
57.—The Council shall, if satisfied that it is in the public interest
to do so, give public notice of—
(a) the cancellation of registration,
(b) the restoration of a registration,
(c) the suspension of a registration,
(d) the expiry of a suspension,
(e) the attachment of conditions to a registration,
(f) the removal of conditions from a registration,
(g) the prohibition for a specified period of a pharmacist or
pharmacy owner from applying for restoration to theregister,
(h) the admonishment or censure of a registered pharmacist
or pharmacy owner,
(i) any action in respect of which the Minister is required to
be notified under section 56(2) .[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
58.—In an action for defamation, anything said or done in any of
the following shall be absolutely privileged—
(a) proceedings of a preliminary proceedings committee or of
a committee of inquiry,
(b) communications by a committee of inquiry,
(c) reports of a committee of inquiry,
(d) mediation under section 37,
(e) communications by the Council under this Part,
(f) any other communication by the Council or a committee
relating to the disciplinary proceedings.
59.—(1) The Council shall cancel a registration if the person to
whom or the owner of the retail pharmacy business to which itrelates—
(a) applies for its cancellation,
(b) pays the prescribed fee,
(c) is not, at the time of applying, the subject of a complaint
under this Part.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) , the circumstances in which
a person or owner of a retail pharmacy business is not subject to acomplaint include those in which—
(a) the Council, under section 39(2) , has decided to take no
further action in relation to the complaint,
(b) the Council, under section 48(1) has dismissed the
complaint,
(c) the Court, under section 51(1) , has ordered the cancel-
lation of a sanction which has followed on the complaintand given no direction under section 51(4)(b) that might
result in another sanction.
60.—The Council may cancel a registration if the person to whom
or owner of the retail pharmacy business to which it relates—
(a) has failed to pay a retention fee or a fee for recording a
change in the register, and
(b) having been notified at least twice by the Council of that
failure, continues so to fail.
61.—(1) The Council shall restore a registration cancelled—
(a) under section 59 , if the person to whom or owner of the
pharmacy business to which it related—
(i) applies for its restoration,
(ii) pays the prescribed fee, and
41Pt.6
Absolute privilege
for disciplinaryproceedings, etc.
Cancellation of
registration onrequest.
Cancellation of
registration onfailure to pay fee.
Restoration of
registration.Pt.6 S.61
Removal of
conditions imposedunder this Part.
42[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(iii) undertakes to comply with such conditions, if any, as
the Council may stipulate,
(b) under section 60 , if the person to whom or owner of the
retail pharmacy business to which the registrationrelated—
(i) applies for its restoration within six months of the
date when the unpaid fee became due,
(ii) pays the prescribed fee and the unpaid fee.
(2) The Council shall, however, refuse to restore a registration
cancelled under section 59 or60if it is satisfied on the basis of new
evidence or evidence of changed circumstances that, were the appli-cant applying instead under section 14 or, as the case may be, section
17, the Council would refuse registration on one of the grounds
specified in section 14(1)(d) or(e)or, as the case may be, section
17(1)(f) .
(3) The Council may, with the consent of the Court, restore a
registration the cancellation of which has been confirmed unders e c t i o n5 1o r5 2 .
(4) Before arriving at a decision under subsection (3) , the Council
shall give the pharmacist to whom the registration related an oppor-tunity to make oral or written submissions to it.
(5) The Council may attach conditions to a restoration under sub-
section (3) .
(6) The Council shall notify the person to whom or the owner of
the retail pharmacy business to which a cancelled registration relatedof its decision under this section.
(7) Section 21 applies also to a refusal to restore a registration
under this section.
62.—(1) The Council may remove a condition attached to a regis-
tration if the pharmacist, or owner of the retail pharmacy businesssubject to the condition—
(a) applies for its removal, and
(b) pays the prescribed fee.
(2) Before arriving at a decision under subsection (1) , the Council
must give the pharmacist or owner referred to in that subsection anopportunity of making oral or written submissions to it.
(3) The Council may, instead of removing a condition, amend it
or substitute another for it.
(4) The Council must notify the pharmacist or owner referred to
insubsection (1) of its decision under this section.
(5) Section 21 applies also to a refusal to remove a condition and
to a decision to amend a condition or substitute another for it.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
63.—(1) For the purposes of section 35 and so much of this Part
as relates to that section, it is professional misconduct by a registeredpharmacist if—
(a) he or she, or
(b) to the knowledge of the registered pharmacist, his or her
partner or employee,
has a beneficial interest in a medical practice.
(2) For the purposes of section 36 and so much of this Part as
relates to that section, it is misconduct of the kind referred to in thatsection by a pharmacy owner if—
(a) the pharmacy owner, or
(b) to the knowledge of the pharmacy owner, a partner or
employee of the pharmacy owner,
has a beneficial interest in a medical practice.
(3) For the purposes of section 45 of the Medical Practitioners
Act 1978 and so much of Part V of that Act as relates to that sectionor any enactments re-enacting those provisions, it is professional mis-conduct by a registered medical practitioner if—
(a) he or she, or
(b) to the knowledge of the registered medical practitioner,
his or her partner or employee,
has a beneficial interest in a registered retail pharmacy business.
(4) For the purposes of this section, an interest consisting of the
ownership of a medical practice or registered retail pharmacy busi-ness (or part thereof)—
(a) is not to be taken to be a beneficial interest in the practice
or business if the benefit deriving from the interest con-sists of the benefit of ownership alone, but
(b) is to be taken to be a beneficial interest in the practice or
business if the benefit so deriving consists of or includesa financial benefit accruing to the registered pharmacistor registered medical practitioner in the exercise of his orher profession as such or, as the case may be, to theowner of the registered retail pharmacy business in his,her or its capacity as such.
(5) In this section—
(a) “beneficial interest” in a medical practice or registered
retail pharmacy business includes—
(i) where the practice or business or a part of it is
owned by—
(I) a company, the interest of a director of or share-
holder in the company,
(II) a corporate body which is not a company, the
interest of a member of the body,
43Pt.6
Prohibition on
certain economicrelationshipsbetweenpharmacists orpharmacies anddoctors.Pt.6 S.63
44[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(ii) where the practice or business is carried on in leased
premises, the interest of the landlord in the rent orother consideration for the tenancy where that rentor other consideration—
(I) does not represent the rental value of the tenancy
on the open market and the difference mayreasonably be attributed to the existence of acommercial relationship between the partiesother than that of landlord and tenant, or
(II) is ascertained by reference to the receipts or pro-
fits of a registered retail pharmacy business or amedical practice,
and a person shall be regarded, for the purposes of this
section, as having a beneficial interest in such a practiceor business if his or her spouse or dependent child hassuch an interest in it;
“dependent child” means, in relation to a person, a child
of that person who is under the age of 18 years or, if heor she has attained that age, is a child to whom paragraph(i) or (ii) of the definition of “dependent child of thefamily” in section 3( a) of the Family Law (Maintenance
of Spouses and Children) Act 1976 applies;
“employee” means a person who works under a contract
of employment (or has entered such a contract in orderto do so) and includes a fixed-term employee and a tem-porary employee;
“partner” shall be construed in accordance with the Part-
nership Act 1890;
“registered medical practitioner” has the meaning given
by the Medical Practitioners Act 1978 or any enactmentre-enacting that definition;
“shareholder” does not include a shareholder in a com-
pany whose holding does not exceed one half of one percent of the total value of shares issued by the company;
“spouse” does not include a spouse who is a registered
pharmacist, a registered pharmaceutical assistant or aregistered medical practitioner;
and
(b) references to leased premises, the landlord, the tenancy,
the rental value and the tenant include, in a case wherepremises are made available for use or occupation onlicence or similarly, references respectively to the prem-ises so made available, the person who makes them avail-able, the use or occupation, the value of that use or occu-pation and the person who uses or occupies them.
(6) A—
(a) pharmacist does not commit professional misconduct by
virtue of subsection (1)(b) ,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) pharmacy owner does not commit misconduct by virtue of
subsection (2)(b) ,
(c) medical practitioner does not commit professional miscon-
duct by virtue of subsection (3)(b) ,
if he or she, within 21 days of becoming aware that his or her partner
has a beneficial interest of the kind respectively referred to in thoseprovisions, notifies the Society (in the case of the pharmacist or thepharmacy owner) or the Medical Council (in the case of the medicalpractitioner) of the existence and nature of the interest.
64.—(1) A registered retail pharmacy business and a medical
practice shall not be carried on—
(a) in the same premises as each other, or
(b) in premises which, although separate—
(i) are such that public access to the one is available only
by way of the other, or
(ii) share a common public entrance with each other,
if there is an arrangement of the kind described in subsection (2) .
(2) An arrangement is of the kind referred to in subsection (1)
if it—
(a) is between the owner of the registered retail pharmacy
business referred to in that subsection or the registeredpharmacist in whole-time charge of that business and aregistered medical practitioner practising in the medicalpractice referred to in that subsection, and
(b) provides for, acknowledges or regulates a financial benefit
to any of them arising from or facilitated by the co-location or juxtaposition described in that subsection.
(3) A registered pharmacist or a pharmacy owner shall not recom-
mend any medical practice or registered medical practitioner to amember of the public otherwise than in the exercise of his or herprofessional judgment as a pharmacist, or, as the case may be, in theproper carrying on of the business.
(4) In subsection (3) , “proper” means in a way not intended to
result in a financial benefit to be derived from the medical practiceor registered medical practitioner referred to in that subsection.
(5) A registered medical practitioner shall not recommend any
pharmacist or retail pharmacy business to a member of the publicotherwise than in the exercise of his or her professional judgment asa registered medical practitioner.
(6) A registered pharmacist or pharmacy owner who is aware of
a contravention of this section shall report it to the Society.
(7) A registered medical practitioner who is aware of a contra-
vention of this section shall report it to the Medical Council.
(8) A contravention of this section—
45Pt.6 S.63
Prohibitions on
carrying on retailpharmacybusinesses andmedical practicestogether and onimproperrecommendations.Pt.6 S.64
Saver for certain
property interests.
Definitions.
46[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(a) by a registered pharmacist shall for the purposes of section
35and so much of this Part as relates to that section,
constitute professional misconduct by the registeredpharmacist,
(b) by the owner of a registered retail pharmacy business shall
for the purposes of section 36 and so much of this Part as
relates to that section, constitute misconduct of the kindreferred to in that provision by the pharmacy owner,
(c) by a registered medical practitioner shall, for the purposes
of section 45 of the Medical Practitioners Act 1978 andso much of Part V of that Act as relates to that section,or any enactment re-enacting those provisions, constituteprofessional misconduct by the registered medical prac-titioner.
(9) Subsections (1) to(4)and (10) and such much of the remain-
der of this section as relates to those subsections shall apply inrelation to a registered retail pharmacy business or medical practicewhich was being lawfully carried on immediately before the passingof this Act only with effect on and from such later date as is specifiedby order made by the Minister.
(10) In this section “registered medical practitioner” has the same
meaning as in section 63 .
65.—Nothing in sections 63 and 64—
(a) shall affect—
(i) the title to any property,
(ii) the validity or terms of any lease of or other contract
relating to property, or
(iii) the validity or terms of any planning permission,
licence, consent or other approval (howeverdescribed) relating to property,
or
(b) shall diminish the freedom of any person referred to in
those sections to enter into a lease or other contract relat-ing to property other than one that gives rise to abeneficial interest of the kind referred to in section 63 or
consists of or includes an arrangement of the kinddescribed in section 64 .
PART 7
Powers of Investigation
66.—In this Part—
“authorised officer” means a person appointed under section 67(1)
to be an authorised officer;
“inspect” includes search;“premises” is not restricted to land and buildings;[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
“record” includes, in addition to a record in writing—
(a) a disc, tape, sound-track or other device in which infor-
mation, sounds or signals are embodied so as to be cap-able (with or without the aid of some other instrument)of being reproduced in legible or audible form,
(b) a film, tape or other device in which visual images are
embodied so as to be capable (with or without the aidof some other instrument) of being reproduced in visualform, and
(c) a photograph,
and any reference to a copy of a record includes—
(i) in the case of a record to which paragraph (a) applies, a
transcript of the sounds or signals embodied therein,
(ii) in the case of a record to which paragraph (b) applies, a
still reproduction of the images embodied therein, and
(iii) in the case of a record to which paragraphs (a) and (b)
apply, such a transcript together with such a stillreproduction;
“relevant thing” means—
(a) any medicinal product,
(b) any article or substance used in the manufacture, prep-
aration, compounding, processing or storage of any med-icinal or veterinary medicinal product, and
(c) any veterinary medicinal product;
“this Act” includes any rule or regulation made under this Act.
67.—(1) The Council—
(a) may appoint such and so many persons as the Council
thinks fit to be authorised officers for the purposes of thisPart, and
(b) shall furnish each authorised officer so appointed with a
warrant of the authorised officer’s appointment.
(2) An authorised officer shall, when performing a function given
by or under this Part to an authorised officer, produce his or herwarrant for inspection if requested to do so by a person affected bythe performance of that function.
(3) For the purposes of ascertaining whether any offence under
this Act, any breach of a code of conduct or any professional miscon-duct has been committed or for obtaining information or evidenceabout these matters, an authorised officer may—
(a) subject to subsection (5) , enter (if necessary by the use of
reasonable force), at all reasonable times, any premisesat which he or she has reasonable grounds for believingthat—
47Pt.7 S.66
Powers of entry,
search, seizure, etc.Pt.7 S.67
48[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(i) any trade, business or activity consisting of or connec-
ted with the carrying on of a retail pharmacy busi-ness, or
(ii) books, records or other documents (including docu-
ments stored in non-legible form) relating to suchtrade, business or activity are kept,
(b) at such premises inspect and take copies of, any books,
records, other such documents or extracts therefrom,which he or she finds in the course of his or herinspection,
(c) remove any such books, records or other documents from
such premises and detain them for such period as he orshe reasonably considers to be necessary for the purposesof his or her functions under this Part,
(d) carry out, or have carried out, such tests, examinations,
analyses, inspections and checks of—
(i) the premises,
(ii) any relevant thing at the premises, or
(iii) any equipment, machinery or plant at the premises,
as he or she reasonably considers to be necessary for the
purposes of his or her functions under this Part,
(e) require any person at the premises or the owner or person
in charge of the premises and any person employed thereto give to him or her such assistance and information andto produce to him or her such books, records or otherdocuments (and in the case of documents or recordsstored in non-legible form, produce to him or her a leg-ible reproduction thereof) that are in that person’s poweror procurement, as he or she may reasonably require forthe purposes of his or her functions under this Part,
(f) without payment, take samples of any relevant thing found
at the premises for the purposes of any test, examinationor analysis,
(g) direct that such relevant thing found at the premises as he
or she, upon reasonable grounds, believes provides infor-mation about or evidence of a contravention of a pro-vision of this Act or of a breach of a code of conduct orof the professional misconduct of a pharmacist not besold or distributed or moved from the premises, withouthis or her consent,
(h) secure for later inspection any premises or part of any
premises in which a relevant thing is found or ordinarilykept, or books, records or other documents are foundor ordinarily kept, for such period as may reasonably benecessary for the purposes of his or her functions underthis Part,
(i) without payment, take possession of and remove from the
premises for any test, examination or analysis any rel-evant thing found there, and detain it for such period as[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
he or she considers reasonably necessary for the purposes
of his or her functions under this Part,
(j) without payment, take samples of any relevant thing,
detained pursuant to paragraph (i) , for the purposes of
any test, examination, or analysis,
(k) where the taking of samples of any relevant thing pursuant
toparagraphs (f) or(j)is, for whatever reason, not practi-
cable, without payment take the relevant thing concernedfor the purposes of any test, examination or analysis,
(l) inspect and copy or extract information from any data
within the meaning of the Data Protection Acts 1988and 2003,
(m) require a person having authority to do so to break open
any container or package, or to open any machine, or topermit him or her to do so, as he or she may reasonablyrequire for the purposes of his or her functions under thisPart, or
(n) require a person, who makes available facilities such as
post office boxes, telecommunications or electronic mailaddresses or other like facilities, to give him or her suchassistance and information as he or she may reasonablyrequire for the purposes of his or her functions under thisPart in any case where the officer has reasonable grounds
for believing that any relevant thing is being supplied bymail or other means of delivery.
(4) When performing a function under this Part, an authorised
officer may, subject to any warrant under subsection (6) ,b e
accompanied by such number of—
(a) other authorised officers,
(b) members of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, or
(c) persons with expertise relating to the relevant thing,
as he or she considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
(5) An authorised officer shall not enter a dwelling, other than—
(a) with the consent of the occupier, or
(b) in accordance with a warrant issued under subsection (6) .
(6) Upon the application of an authorised officer, a judge of the
District Court, if satisfied that there are reasonable grounds forbelieving that—
(a) a relevant thing is to be found in any dwelling, or is being
or has been subjected to any process or stored in anydwelling,
(b) a dwelling is occupied in whole or in part by an under-
taking engaged in any trade, business or activity referredto in subsection (3)(a)(i) ,o r
49Pt.7 S.67Pt.7 S.67
Samples.
50[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(c) books, records or other documents (including documents
stored in non-legible form) referred to in subsection
(3)(a)(ii) are being stored or kept in any dwelling,
may issue a warrant authorising a named authorised officer
accompanied by such other authorised officers, members of theGarda Sı ´ocha´na, or persons with expertise relating to any relevant
thing, as may be necessary, at any time or times within one monthof the date of issue of the warrant, to enter the dwelling and performany of the functions of an authorised officer under subsection (3)(b)
to(n).
(7) Any person who—
(a) obstructs or interferes with an authorised officer, a
member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, or a person with expert-
ise relating to any relevant thing, in the course of per-forming a function conferred on him or her by this Partor a warrant under subsection (6) ,
(b) impedes the performance by the officer, member, or per-
son with expertise, as the case may be, of such functionor fails or refuses to comply with a request or require-ment of, or to answer a question asked by, the officer,member, or person with expertise, as the case may be,pursuant to this paragraph, or
(c) in purported compliance with such request or requirement
or in answer to such question gives information to theofficer, member, or person with expertise, as the casemay be, that he or she knows to be false or misleading inany material respect,
shall be guilty of an offence.
(8) Where an authorised officer, upon reasonable grounds,
believes that a person has committed an offence under this Act, heor she may require that person to provide him or her with his or hername and the address at which he or she ordinarily resides.
(9) A person who, without reasonable excuse, does not comply
with a requirement under subsection (8) shall be guilty of an offence.
(10) A statement or admission made by a person pursuant to a
requirement under subsection (3)(e) shall not be admissible as evi-
dence in proceedings brought against that person for an offence(other than an offence under subsection (7) ).
(11) A person who falsely represents himself or herself to be an
authorised officer shall be guilty of an offence.
(12) Nothing in this paragraph shall be taken to compel the pro-
duction by any person of a document which he or she would beexempt from producing in proceedings in a court on the ground oflegal professional privilege.
68.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , where an authorised officer
takes a sample of a relevant thing pursuant to section 67(3)(f) or(j),
he or she shall—
(a) divide the sample into 3 approximately equal parts,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) place each part into separate containers, and
(c) forthwith seal and mark each such container in such a
manner as to identify it as part of the sample taken bythat authorised officer.
(2) Where an authorised officer has complied with subsection (1) ,
he or she shall—
(a) offer one of the sealed containers to the owner or person
for the time being in charge or possession of the relevantthing from which the sample concerned was taken,
(b) retain one of the sealed containers, and
(c) forward, or cause to be forwarded, one of the sealed con-
tainers for test, examination or analysis of the sampleconcerned by a person mentioned in section 69(1)(a) ,(b)
or(c).
(3) Where a relevant thing is contained in a container and its div-
ision into parts pursuant to subsection (1) is, for whatever reason,
not practicable, an authorised officer who wishes to take samples ofsuch relevant things for the purposes of any tests, examination oranalysis shall take possession of 3 such containers belonging to thesame batch, and each such container shall be deemed to be part ofa sample for the purposes of subsection (1) , and the provisions of
subsections (1) and (2)shall apply thereto accordingly.
(4) Where an authorised officer takes a relevant thing pursuant
tosection 67(3)(k) , he or she shall—
(a) place the relevant thing in a container,
(b) forthwith seal and mark the container in such a manner as
to identify it as a relevant thing taken pursuant to thatsection, and
(c) forward, or cause to be forwarded, the sealed container
for test, examination or analysis of the relevant thing bya person mentioned in section 69(1)(a) ,(b)or(c).
69.—(1) In any proceedings for an offence under this Act, a cer-
tificate in the form specified in Schedule 3 to this Act signed by—
(a) either—
(i) the State Chemist, or
(ii) another chemist employed or engaged at the State
Laboratory and authorised by the State Chemist tosign the certificate,
(b) either—
(i) a public analyst appointed under section 10 of the Sale
of Food and Drugs Act 1875, or
(ii) another analyst authorised by such a public analyst to
sign the certificate,
51Pt.7 S.68
Evidence.Pt.7 S.69
Indemnification of
authorised officers.
Functions of
Council on receiptof report ofinvestigation byauthorised officer.
52[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
or
(c) a chemist or analyst appointed by the Council,
stating the result of any test, examination or analysis of a sample of
any relevant thing, or of a relevant thing, as the case may be, for-warded under section 68(2)(c) or(4)(c) shall, with regard to that
sample of the relevant thing, or the relevant thing, as the case maybe, be evidence of the matters stated in the certificate unless thecontrary is proved.
(2) In proceedings for an offence under this Act, a relevant thing,
or a package containing a relevant thing, that bears a trademarkshall, unless the contrary is proved, be evidence that the thing wasmanufactured by the person who at the time of the alleged com-mission of the offence owned that trademark.
(3) In this paragraph, “trademark” has the same meaning as it has
in the Trade Marks Act 1996.
70.—Where the Council is satisfied that an authorised officer
appointed by it has discharged his or her functions under this Partin good faith, the Council shall indemnify the authorised officeragainst all actions or claims arising out of the discharge of thosefunctions.
71.—(1) The Council shall consider a written report from an auth-
orised officer following his or her investigation under this Part, assoon as practicable after receipt of it and shall do whatever of thefollowing that it considers appropriate—
(a) take no action,
(b) commence disciplinary proceedings,
(c) if it appears to the Council that any person to whom the
written report refers is guilty of an offence, it shall, sub-ject to paragraph (d) and subsection (3) , direct the regis-
trar to take specified action and the registrar shall takesuch action,
(d) take such other action as it considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c) , specified action to be
taken by the registrar may include referring the matter to any publicbody or authority exercising functions which are relevant to thematters considered by the Council when directing the action referredto in that provision and, in such a case, the registrar shall furnishsuch information, and give such access to and facilities for inspectingand taking any copies of any documents being information or docu-ments in the possession or under the control of the authorisedofficer, the Council, or the registrar and relating to the matter inquestion as that body or authority, may require.
(3) The action which the Council may take under subsection
(1)(d) includes, in the case of an offence under this Act, the bringing
by the Council of summary proceedings for the offence.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
72.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , a person guilty of an offence
under this Act or regulations made thereunder is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or toboth,
(b) on conviction on indictment—
(i) in the case of a first offence, to a fine not exceeding
\130,000, or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 5 years, or to both,
(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent offence under
the same provision, to a fine not exceeding \320,000,
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10years, or to both.
(2) Unless it is satisfied that there are special and substantial
reasons for not so doing, the court shall, where the person is con-victed of an offence, order a person to pay to the prosecution thecosts and expenses, measured by the court, incurred by the pros-ecution in relation to the prosecution of the offence.
(3) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a corporate
body and is proved to have been so committed with the consent,connivance or approval of, or to have been attributable to any wilfulneglect on the part of, any person being a director, manager, sec-retary or any other officer of the corporate body or a person whowas purporting to act in any such capacity, that person, as well asthe corporate body, is guilty of an offence and is liable to be pro-ceeded against and punished as if he or she were guilty of the first-mentioned offence.
(4) In subsection (3) , “director” includes a shadow director within
the meaning given by section 27 of the Companies Act 1990.
PART 8
Miscellaneous and General
73.—The powers conferred by the Apothecaries’ Hall Act 1791—
(a) upon the court of directors constituted by that Act, to
inspect and direct all chemical and compound prep-arations and experiments,
(b) to provide for or concerning the composition of medi-
cines, and
(c) to examine apprentices and journeymen for the purposes
of their learning and transacting the business of apoth-ecaries and to certify them as qualified for thosepurposes,
shall cease to be exercisable.
74.—(1) Section 14 of the Poisons Act 1961 is amended by
inserting the following after subsection (3)—
53Pt.7
Penalties for
offences.
Restriction of
Apothecaries’ HallAct 1791.
Amendment of
Poisons Act 1961.Pt.8 S.74
54[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
“(3A) The Minister may not, however, declare a substance
whose sole use is as a medicinal product within the meaning ofsection 2(1) of the Pharmacy Act 2007 to be a poison for the
purposes of the regulations made under subsection (2) or anyprovision of those regulations.”.
(2) The Poisons Act 1961 is amended by inserting the following
after section 18—
“Keeping of
open shop forsale of poisons.18A.—(1) A person who, otherwise than in
compliance with subsections (3) or (4), keeps openshop for the sale of poisons commits an offence.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to
the keeping of open shop by a person of a classspecified in regulations under section 14 who iskeeping open shop in accordance with thoseregulations.
(3) This subsection is complied with if—
(a) the person referred to in subsection (1)
is—
(i) a registered pharmacist,
(ii) a registered druggist,
(iii) the personal representative of a
person who, at the time of his orher death, was lawfully keepingopen shop for the sale of poisons,
(iv) the Official Assignee or committee
of a person lawfully keeping openshop for the sale of poisons who isadjudicated bankrupt or becomesan arranging debtor within themeaning of section 3 of the Bank-ruptcy Act 1988 or becomes ofunsound mind, or
(v) a corporate body,
and
(b) the shop is personally managed by a
registered pharmacist or registereddruggist.
(4) The Council of the Pharmaceutical Society
of Ireland shall, with the approval of the Minister,make such rules as it considers appropriate for thepurpose of facilitating the operation of and com-pliance with subsections (1) to (4); and those rulesmay include provision for—
(a) the keeping of records in relation to the
premises where open shop is kept forthe sale of poisons and in relation to
persons employed in such shops, and[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) the furnishing of statements and
returns.
(5) Subsection (4) ofsection 11 of the Pharmacy
Act 2007 shall apply in relation to rules made
under subsection (4) of this section as it applies torules made under subsections (2) or(3)of that
section.
(6) A person guilty of an offence under this
section shall, on summary conviction, be liable tothe same penalty as is provided for, on summaryconviction, in section 72(1) of the Pharmacy Act
2007 .
(7) Section 72(2) and (3)of the Pharmacy Act
2007 apply in respect of an offence under this
section as they apply to an offence under thatAct.”.
75.—(1) Any reference (however expressed) in a prior enactment
to a pharmaceutical chemist registered under the Pharmacy Act(Ireland) 1875 or a dispensing chemist and druggist registered underthe Pharmacy Act 1951 shall be construed as a reference to a regis-tered pharmacist.
(2) Any reference (however expressed) in a prior enactment to a
person who is keeping open shop for the dispensing or compoundingof medical prescriptions under the Pharmacy Acts 1875 to 1977—
(a) where that person is, in relation to a pharmacist, a rep-
resentative within the meaning given by section 25(2) ,
shall be construed as a reference to such a representa-tive, and
(b) in any other case, shall be construed as a reference to a
registered retail pharmacy business.
(3) In this section—
“prior enactment” means an enactment passed or made before the
coming into operation of this section;
“representative of a registered pharmacist” shall be construed in
accordance with sections 25 and 26.
76.—(1) A code of conduct having effect under sections
7(2)(a)(iii) and 12, rules made under section 11 ,30or74and regu-
lations made under section 18(4) shall be laid before each House of
the Oireachtas as soon as practicable after it has effect or, as the casemay be, they are made.
(2) If a resolution annulling those regulations is passed by either
such House within the next 21 days on which that House has sat afterthe regulations were laid before it, the regulations shall be annulledaccordingly, but without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-viously done under the regulations.
(3) A draft of every proposed order under section 8 shall be laid
before each House of the Oireachtas and the order shall not be made
55Pt.8 S.74
Interpretation of
references topharmaceuticalchemists, personskeeping open shop,etc.
Codes, rules and
regulations.Pt.8 S.76
Section 10 .
56[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
unless a resolution approving of the draft has been passed by each
such House.
SCHEDULE 1
The Council and its members and the society’s employees
Term of office
1. (1) Members of the Council shall hold office for a term of 4
years from the date of appointment.
(2) But 6 of the members first appointed by virtue of sections
10(3)(a), (b), (c), (d), and(e), and 5of those first appointed by virtue
ofsection 10(3)(f) (as read with section 10(5) ) and (g)after the pass-
ing of this Act shall hold office for a term of 2 years from the dateof appointment.
(3) The members making up the numbers mentioned in subpara-
graph (2) shall be determined by lot to be drawn in the manner fixed
by the Minister.
Disqualification from Office
2. (1) A person shall not be qualified for office and a member
shall cease to be so qualified and shall cease to hold office if heor she—
(a) is adjudicated bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with creditors,
(c) is convicted of any indictable offence,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty,
(e) is the subject of an order under section 160 of the Com-
panies Act 1990, or
(f) is sentenced to a term of imprisonment.
(2) A disqualification under subparagraph (1)(a) ,(c),(d)or(e)
shall not take effect until the ordinary time for appealing against theadjudication, conviction or, as the case may be, order has expired, orif an appeal is brought, it (or any further appeal) is determined in away which upholds the adjudication, conviction or order or isabandoned.
(3) The Minister may at any time remove a member from office
if—
(a) in the Minister’s opinion, the member has become
incapable, through ill-health, of performing his or herfunctions,
(b) the member has committed stated misbehaviour, or
(c) the removal of the member appears to the Minister to be
necessary for the Council to perform its functionseffectively.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(4) Subparagraph (2) does not limit the Minister’s power under
paragraph 21(2) to remove any or all of the members of the Council.
Conditions of office
3. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a member shall hold
office upon such terms and conditions (including terms and con-ditions relating to expenses and allowances) as are determined bythe Minister with the consent of the Minister for Finance.
President and Vice-President
4. (1) The Council shall elect from among its members who are
registered pharmacists a President and a Vice-President, to be knownas the President and Vice-President respectively of the Pharmaceut-ical Society of Ireland (in this Schedule referred to as “President”and “Vice-President” respectively).
(2) The President and Vice-President shall each hold office for
one year.
(3) No person may hold the office of President or Vice-President
for more than 2 consecutive years.
Casual Vacancies
5. (1) If a member dies, resigns, or ceases to hold office or is
removed from office, (in this paragraph referred to as a “formermember”), the Minister may appoint a person (in this paragraphreferred to as a “new member”) to fill the casual vacancy in thesame way (having regard to section 10(3) ) as the former member
was appointed.
(2) A new member shall hold office for the period of office of
the former member that remained unexpired at the date of the newmember’s appointment and shall be eligible for reappointment onthe expiry of that period.
Meetings and Procedure of the Council
6. (1) The Council shall hold 4 meetings in each period of 12
months and may hold such other meetings as are necessary for theperformance of its functions.
(2) At a meeting of the Council—
(a) the President, or
(b) in his or her absence, the Vice-President, or
(c) in both their absences, a member chosen by the members
present,
shall chair the meeting.(3) The reference in subsection (2) to the absence of the President
or Vice-President includes reference to a vacancy in that office.
(4) Every question at a meeting shall be determined by a majority
of the votes of the members present and voting and, in the case ofan equal division of votes, the chair shall have a casting vote.
57Sch. 1Sch. 1
58[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(5) Subject to subparagraph (6) , the Council may act notwith-
standing one or more vacancies in its membership.
(6) The quorum for a meeting shall be, unless the Minister other-
wise directs, 11 members.
(7) The Council shall arrange for the recording of the business
done at its meetings and those of its committees and, subject to thatand the other provisions of this Act, shall regulate its procedure andthat of its committees by rules and otherwise as it sees fit.
Committees of the Council
7. (1) In addition to the disciplinary committees which the
Council must set up under section 34 , it may establish committees to
advise it in relation to the performance of its functions (in this Sched-ule referred to as “advisory committees”) and may determine theirterms of reference.
(2) Subparagraphs (3) to(6)shall apply to disciplinary commit-
tees and advisory committees.
(3) A committee may include persons who are not members of
the Council.
(4) A member of a committee may be removed from it by the
Council.
(5) The Council shall appoint a member of a committee to chair it.(6) The Council shall fix the quorum of a committee.(7) The Council may dissolve a committee established under sub-
paragraph (1) .
Membership of either House of the Oireachtas or European
Parliament by a Member of the Council or Staff of the Society
8. (1) A member of the Council who is—
(a) nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) elected as a member of either House of the Oireachtas or
the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to Part XIII of the Second Schedule to
the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 as havingbeen elected to that Parliament,
shall then cease to be a member of the Council.(2) An employee of the Society who is—
(a) nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) elected as a member of either House of the Oireachtas or
the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to Part XIII of the Second Schedule to
the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 as havingbeen elected to that Parliament,
shall then stand seconded from employment by the Society.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(3) An employee seconded under subparagraph (2) shall not be
paid by, or entitled to receive from, the Society any remuneration orallowances in respect of the period beginning on such nomination orelection or when he or she is so regarded as having been elected (asthe case may be) and ending when such person ceases to be amember of either such House or a member of such Parliament.
(4) A person who is entitled under the standing orders of either
House of the Oireachtas to sit in it or who is a member of the Euro-pean Parliament shall be, while so entitled or while such a member,disqualified from membership of the Council and from becomingemployed in any capacity by the Council.
(5) A period mentioned in subparagraph (3) shall not, for the pur-
poses of any superannuation benefit, be reckoned as service withthe Society.
Disclosure of certain interests
9. (1) In this paragraph—
“connected relative”, in relation to a person, means a spouse, a
man and woman who are not married to each other but arecohabiting as husband and wife, parent, brother, sister, child orspouse of a child of the person;
“meeting” means a meeting of the Council or of a committee of
the Council;
“member” includes a member of a committee of the Council;“specified matter” means—
(a) an arrangement to which the Council is a party or a pro-
posed such arrangement, or
(b) a contract or other agreement with the Council or a pro-
posed such contract or agreement.
(2) A member present at a meeting where a specified matter
arises who, otherwise than in his or her capacity as a member, hasan interest in that matter—
(a) shall at the meeting, disclose that fact and the extent of
the interest,
(b) may not influence or seek to influence a decision to be
made in relation to the matter,
(c) shall absent himself or herself from the meeting or that
part of the meeting during which the matter is beingdiscussed,
(d) may not vote on a decision relating to the matter, and
(e) may not take part in any further deliberation of the
Council or any of its committees relating to the matter.
(3) For the purposes of this paragraph, but without prejudice to
the generality of subparagraph (2) , a member shall be regarded as
having an interest in a matter if a connected relative of that memberor a nominee of either of them has such an interest.
59Sch. 1Sch. 1
60[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(4) The disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting
and, for as long as the specified matter is being dealt with by themeeting, the member making the disclosure may not be counted forthe purposes of determining the presence of a quorum for themeeting.
(5) The question of whether a member’s course of conduct, is or
would be a contravention of subparagraph (2) shall be determined
by the chair, whose decision shall be final, and the particulars of thedetermination shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
(6) Where the member referred to in subparagraph (4) is the
chair, the meeting shall choose another member to chair it for thepurposes of the determination.
(7) If satisfied that a member has contravened subparagraph (2) ,
the Minister may remove the member from office and that person isthen disqualified from office.
Disclosure by employees of certain interests
10. (1) In this paragraph—“connected relative” has the same meaning as in paragraph 9 ;
“material interest” has the same meaning in relation to an
employee of the Society as it has in the Ethics in Public Office Act1995 in relation to a person holding a designated position;
“specified matter” has the same meaning as in paragraph 9 .
(2) An employee of the Society who, otherwise than as such, has
a material interest in a specified matter—
(a) shall disclose that fact to the Council and the extent of
the interest,
(b) may not influence or seek to influence any decision to be
made in relation to the matter,
(c) may not make any recommendation relating to the
matter, and
(d) may not take part in the negotiation of the matter or in
any deliberation by the Council or the Society’semployees relating to that matter.
(3) For the purposes of this paragraph but without prejudice to
the generality of subparagraph (2) , an employee shall be regarded as
having a material interest in a matter if a connected relative of theemployee or either of them has such an interest.
(4) Where an employee fails to make a disclosure in accordance
with this paragraph, the Council shall decide the appropriate action(which may include termination of his or her contract ofemployment) to be taken.
Prohibition of unauthorised disclosure of confidential information
11. (1) A person who discloses confidential information
obtained as—
(a) a member of the Council or one of its committees,[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(b) an adviser or consultant to the Society or the Council or
one of its committees,
(c) an employee of the Society,
shall be guilty of an offence.(2) In this paragraph, “confidential information” includes—
(a) information declared by the Council to be confidential
(whether particular information or information of a classor description), and
(b) proposals of a commercial nature or tenders submitted to
the Council.
(3) Nothing in this paragraph prohibits the disclosure of infor-
mation by means of a report made—
(a) to the Society, the Council or one of its committees, or
(b) by or on behalf of the Council to the Minister.
Application of surpluses
12. (1) Subparagraph (2) applies to any money appearing to the
Council to be left over after meeting its expenses (in this paragraphreferred to as the “surplus”).
(2) The Council may spend the surplus including any surplus fol-
lowing disposal of assets as it sees fit on—
(a) the development of education,
(b) research, or
(c) any other public purpose,
connected with pharmacy.
Registrar
13. (1) The Council shall appoint a chief officer of the Society, to
be known as the Registrar of the Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland(in this Act referred to as the “registrar”).
(2) The registrar shall be paid by the Society such remuneration
and allowances as the Council, with the approval of the Ministerwith the consent of the Minister for Finance, determines from timeto time.
(3) The registrar shall be employed on such other terms and con-
ditions as the Council, with the approval of the Minister, determines.
(4) The registrar shall keep the registers, manage and control the
administration and business of the Society and the Council and per-form such other functions as may be determined by the Council.
Staff of the Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland
14. (1) The Council may engage such and such number of per-
sons to be employees of the Society as the Council, with the approval
61Sch. 1Sch. 1
62[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
of the Minister with the consent of the Minister for Finance, may
determine.
(2) An employee of the Society shall be paid by the Council such
remuneration and allowances as the Council, with the approval ofthe Minister with the consent of the Minister for Finance determinesfrom time to time.
(3) An employee of the Society shall be employed on such other
terms and conditions as the Council, with the approval of the Mini-ster, determines from time to time.
(4) An employee of the Society shall perform such duties as the
Council determines from time to time.
(5) An employee of the Society may not be a member of the
Council.
Superannuation
15. (1) The Society shall prepare and submit to the Minister a
scheme or schemes for the granting of superannuation benefits toor in respect of such members of the staff of the Society as it maythink fit.
(2) Every such scheme shall fix the time and conditions of retire-
ment for all persons to or in respect of whom superannuationbenefits are payable under the scheme, and different times and con-ditions may be fixed in respect of different classes of persons.
(3) Every such scheme may be amended or revoked by a sub-
sequent scheme prepared, submitted and approved under thissection.
(4) A scheme submitted by a Society under this section shall, if
approved by the Minister with the consent of the Minister for Fin-ance, be carried out by the Society in accordance with its terms.
(5) No superannuation benefit shall be granted by the Society nor
shall any other arrangements be entered into by the Society for theprovision of such a benefit to or in respect of a member of the staffof the Society otherwise than in accordance with a scheme underthis section or with the consent of the Minister and the Ministerfor Finance.
(6) Each scheme made under this section shall make provision
for appeals.
(7) A scheme under this section shall be laid before each House
of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if a resol-ution annulling the scheme is passed by either such House within thenext 21 days on which that House has sat after the scheme is laidbefore it, the scheme shall be annulled accordingly, but withoutprejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.
Accounts and audit
16. (1) The Council shall keep proper accounts—
(a) of all income and expenditure of the Society, including the
sources of such income, and
(b) of the property and liabilities of the Society.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(2) The accounts shall be audited at least once in every year by
an auditor appointed by the Council for that purpose and the fees ofthe auditor and the expenses of the audit shall be paid by the Councilas soon as practicable after each audit.
(3) Not later than 3 months after the end of the financial year to
which the accounts relate, the Council shall submit copies of theaccounts and the auditors’ certificate and report to the Minister.
(4) As soon as practicable after those copies have been so submit-
ted, the Minister shall lay them before each House of the Oireachtasand as soon as practicable after they have been so laid, the Councilshall have them printed, published and put on sale.
Annual report
17. (1) Not later than 3 months after the end of each financial
year, the Council shall submit to the Minister a report on its activitiesin that year and the Minster shall, as soon as practicable, lay copiesof the report before each House of the Oireachtas.
(2) As soon as practicable after the report has been so submitted,
the Council shall have it printed, published and put on sale.
Council’s exercise of Society’s borrowing power
18. (1) The Council’s exercise of the Society’s power to borrow
shall be subject to any conditions that may be imposed by, or inaccordance with any directions given by, the Minster with the con-sent of the Minister for Finance.
(2) Any money so borrowed and any interest accruing on it shall
be secured on the income or property of the Society.
Acceptance of gifts by the Council
19. The Council may accept gifts of land, money or other prop-
erty, but only if any trusts or conditions specified by the donor areconsistent with the Society’s functions.
Power to charge and recover fees
20. (1) The Society may charge such fees as may, with the
approval of the Minister, from time to time, be prescribed for any orall the following:
(a) registration;
(b) continued registration;
(c) the issue of certificates of registration or continued
registration;
(d) the making of alterations in a register under section
22(2)(a) ;
(e) the restoration of a name to a register under section 61 ;
(f) any other service provided by virtue of this Act.
(2) The Society may recover, as a simple contract debt, any
amount owed in respect of a fee charged under this section.
63Sch. 1Sch. 1
Section 16.
64[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
Failure of Council to perform a function
21. (1) If the Council fails to perform any of its functions the
Minister may, in writing, direct it—
(a) to perform the function within the time specified in the
direction, and
(b) for that purpose, to do any other thing that is ancillary or
incidental to the performance of the function.
(2) If the Council does not comply with the direction the Minister
may, by order, remove from office any or all of its members andperform the function himself or herself.
Annual service plan and corporate strategy
22. The Society shall prepare an annual service plan and a corpor-
ate strategy.
SCHEDULE 2
Recognition of Professional Qualifications in Pharmacy
1. Subject to paragraph 3 , the Council shall determine an appli-
cation for registration made by a person proffering a qualification inpharmacy such as is mentioned in section 16(3) ,(4)or(5)as soon as
possible after receiving all documents prescribed for the purposesof determining the application or required by the Council for thosepurposes under section 14 and, in any event, within 3 months after
such receipt.
2. The Council may require of the competent authorities of the
home relevant state—
(a) confirmation of the authenticity of diplomas, certificates
and other evidence of formal qualifications in pharmacyissued in that state and referred to in Articles 21, 23 and50 of the Professional Qualifications Directive,
(b) confirmation that a person proffering a qualification such
as is mentioned in paragraph 1 has fulfilled the minimum
training requirements specified in Article 23 or, as thecase may be, 44 of the Professional QualificationsDirective.
3. The Council is hereby designated, for the purposes of Article
50.1 of the Professional Qualification Directive, as the competentauthority in the State to demand and receive and to issue diplomas,certificates and other documents concerning education for, qualifi-cations in and the practice of pharmacy.
4. The Council shall ensure the confidentiality of information
received under Article 50.1 of the Professional QualificationsDirective.
5. Where the Council gives information to a relevant state under
Article 50 of the Professional Qualifications Directive, the followingprovisions shall apply—[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
(a) the 3 month period referred to in paragraph 1 is extended
by the period equal to that beginning on the day on whichthe information is given to the relevant state and endingon the day on which that relevant state gives its reply, or3 months, whichever is the shorter,
(b) where that relevant state does not give its reply within the
period of 2 months specified in paragraph (1)( d)o f
Annex VII to that Directive and the documents referredto in that paragraph are not replaced by a declarationon oath or by a solemn declaration as provided by thatparagraph, then, if the Council, having regard to and onlyto that information, is of the opinion that the person mak-ing the application to which the information relates doesnot comply with section 14(1)(d) or(f), it shall refuse to
register that person.
6. In registering a person under section 14 as read with section
16(2)(b) —
(a) the Council may impose a condition requiring the person,
when professing or otherwise using any academic title,status or other qualification specified in the condition,being a title, status or qualification that is relevant to theperson’s registration, to indicate by whom it was con-ferred or awarded,
(b) the Council, if of the opinion that any such title, status or
qualification that is so relevant is capable of being under-stood as indicating that the person has pursued a prog-ramme of education other than that which he or she pur-sued, may impose a condition requiring the person, whenprofessing or otherwise using the title, status or qualifi-cation, to do so in a manner specified in the condition orotherwise directed by the Council.
7. If a person does not comply with a condition imposed under
paragraph 6 , the Council may, without more—
(a) suspend the registration of the person for a specified
period, or
(b) cancel the person’s registration,
as if under section 45 .
8.Sections 49 to52shall apply in respect of a condition or sanc-
tion imposed under this Schedule as they apply in respect of oneimposed under Part 6 .
9. In considering an application for registration under section 14
as read with section 16(2)(b) , the Council shall take into account any
relevant training undergone or experience gained in a third country.
10. In this Schedule—
(a) “home relevant state” in relation to a pharmacist, means
the relevant state in which the pharmacist acquired his orher diploma, certificate or other qualifications in phar-macy or in which he or she is registered as a pharmacist,
(b) expressions also used in section 16 have the same meaning
as in that section.
65Sch. 2Section 69 .
66[No. 20.] [2007.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 3
Certificate stating results of test, examination or analysis
This certificate is issued by me, the undersigned, for the purpose of
section 69 of the Pharmacy Act 2007 , being—
1................................................................
I hereby certify that I received, on the .................. day of......................................................................., from
2.....................................................
................................................................................................................................................................................. of ......................................................................................... a sample of the relevant thing/the relevant thing
*,
being3...........................................................................................................
...................................................for test, examination or analysis; whichwas undamaged, duly sealed and marked
4.............................................
........................................................................................................................I further certify that the said sample/relevant thing has been tested,
examined or analysed by me or under my direction and that theresults are as follows—
5.............................................................................
................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................Signature.....................................................................................................Date...............................................................................................................Address .........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
1. Here insert official title of person signing the certificate.
2. Here insert the name of the authorised officer who submitted the sample of the
relevant thing, or the relevant thing, as the case may be.
3. Here insert the name or description of the relevant thing.4. Here insert distinguishing mark on the sample of the relevant thing, or the relevant
thing, as the case may be, and the date shown on its container as the date ofsampling, or the date on which the relevant thing was taken into possession, asthe case may be.
5. Here insert the relevant results as appropriate.
* Delete whichever is inapplicable.[2007.] [ No. 20.] Pharmacy Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 4
Enactments Repealed
Session and chapter Short Title Extent of repeal
or year and number
(2) (3)
(1)
31 Geo. 3., c. 34 Apothecaries’ Hall Sections 22 to 31
Act 1791
38 & 39 Vic., c. 57 Pharmacy Act The whole Act
(Ireland) 1875
53 & 54 Vic., c. 48 Pharmacy Act, The whole Act
(Ireland) AmendmentAct 1890
8 Edw. 7., c. 55 Poisons and Pharmacy The whole Act
Act 1908
1951 No. 30 Pharmacy Act 1951 The whole Act
1962 No. 14 Pharmacy Act 1962 The whole Act
1977 No. 12 Misuse of Drugs Act Section 32
1977
67Section 4 .