————————
Number 4of2009
————————
ELECTORAL (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title, collective citations and construction.
2. Interpretation.
PART 2
Da´il Constituencies and Number of Members
3. Number of members of Da ´il E´ireann.
4. Constituencies.5. Number of members to be returned for constituency.6. Repeal.
PART 3
European Parliament Constituencies and Number of Members
7. Amendment of section 15 of European Parliament Elections
Act 1997.
8. Substitution of Third Schedule to European Parliament Elec-
tions Act 1997.
PART 4
Constituency Commission
9. Substitution of Part II of Electoral Act 1997.
12[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
PART 5
European Parliament Elections
10. Substitution of sections 12 and 13 of European Parliament
Elections Act 1997.
11. Substitution of rules 2 to 5 of Second Schedule to European
Parliament Elections Act 1997.
12. Substitution of rule 13 of Second Schedule to European Par-
liament Elections Act 1997.
13. Amendment of rules 17 and 88 of Second Schedule to Euro-
pean Parliament Elections Act 1997.
14. Amendment of Schedule to Electoral Act 1997.
PART 6
Local Elections
15. Substitution of articles 11 to 20 of Local Elections
Regulations.
16. Amendment of article 83 of Local Elections Regulations.17. Amendment of article 84 of Local Elections Regulations.18. Amendment of article 86 of Local Elections Regulations.19. Amendment of Local Elections (Disclosure of Donations
and Expenditure) Act 1999.
20. Confirmation of Local Elections Regulations.
SCHEDULE
————————
Acts Referred to
Civil Service Regulation Acts 1956 to 2005
Electoral (Amendment) Act 2005 2005, No. 16Electoral Act 1997 1997, No. 25Electoral Acts 1992 to 2007European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2European Parliament Elections Acts 1992 to 2006Local Elections (Disclosure of Donations and
Expenditure) Act 1999 1999, No. 7
Local Elections Acts 1974 to 2006Statutory Declarations Act 1938 1938, No. 37Succession Act 1965 1965, No. 27————————
Number 4of2009
————————
ELECTORAL (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO REVISE DA ´IL AND EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
CONSTITUENCIES, TO PROVIDE FOR THE NUMBEROF MEMBERS TO BE ELECTED FOR SUCH CONSTITU-ENCIES, TO AMEND THE LAW RELATING TO THECONSTITUENCY COMMISSION, AND FOR THOSE ANDOTHER PURPOSES TO AMEND THE EUROPEAN PAR-LIAMENT ELECTIONS ACT 1997 AND CERTAIN OTHERENACTMENTS, TO AMEND AND GIVE STATUTORYEFFECT TO THE LOCAL ELECTIONS REGULATIONS1995 AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[24th February , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Electoral (Amendment)
Act 2009.
(2) The Electoral Acts 1992 to 2007 and this Act may be cited
together as the Electoral Acts 1992 to 2009 and shall be read togetheras one.
(3) The European Parliament Elections Acts 1992 to 2006 and
this Act (in so far as it relates to European Parliament elections)may be cited together as the European Parliament Elections Acts1992 to 2009 and shall be read together as one.
(4) The Local Elections Acts 1974 to 2006 and this Act (in so far
as it relates to local elections) may be cited together as the LocalElections Acts 1974 to 2009 and shall be read together as one.
2.—(1) In this Act “Local Elections Regulations” means the Local
Elections Regulations 1995 (S.I. No. 297 of 1995).
(2) In the Schedule —
(a) a reference to a former rural district shall be construed
as a reference to that district as constituted immediatelybefore 1 October 1925, and
3Short title,
collective citationsand construction.
Interpretation.Pt.1 S.2
Number of
members of Da ´il
E´ireann.
Constituencies.
Number of
members to bereturned forconstituency.
Repeal.
Amendment of
section 15 ofEuropeanParliamentElections Act 1997.
Substitution of
Third Schedule toEuropeanParliamentElections Act 1997.[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(b) a reference to a line drawn along any motorway, road or
street shall be construed as a reference to a line drawnalong the centre of such motorway, road or street.
PART 2
Da´il Constituencies and Number of Members
3.—Da ´il E´ireann shall, after the dissolution thereof that next
occurs after the passing of this Act, consist of 166 members.
4.—(1) The members of Da ´il E´ireann shall, after the dissolution
of Da ´il E´ireann that next occurs after the passing of this Act, rep-
resent the constituencies specified in the Schedule .
(2) An area specified in the Schedule shall be taken to be that
area as constituted on 1 March 2008, but if any doubt arises as to theconstituency in which any electoral division or part thereof, or anytownland or part thereof, is included, the doubt shall, subject tosection 2(2)(b) , be determined by the Minister for the Environment,
Heritage and Local Government.
5.—A constituency specified in the Schedule shall return the
number of members set out in respect thereof in the third column of
thatSchedule.
6.—(1) Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 of, and the Schedule to, the
Electoral (Amendment) Act 2005 are repealed.
(2)Subsection (1) shall come into operation on the dissolution of
Da´il E´ireann that next occurs after the passing of this Act.
PART 3
European Parliament Constituencies and Number of Members
7.—Section 15 of the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 is
amended by substituting the following subsection for subsection (3):
“(3) An area specified in the Third Schedule shall be taken
to be that area as constituted on 1 March 2008.”.
8.—The European Parliament Elections Act 1997 is amended as
respects European elections held after 1 January 2009 by substitutingthe following Schedule for the Third Schedule to that Act:[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Section 15.“THIRD SCHEDULE
Constituencies
Constituency Area Number of Members
Dublin The counties of: 3
Du´n Laoghaire-
Rathdown, Fingaland South Dublin;
and the city of
Dublin.
East The counties of: 3
Carlow, Kildare,
Kilkenny, Laois,Louth, Meath, Offaly,Wexford andWicklow.
North-West The counties of: 3
Cavan, Clare,
Donegal, Galway,Leitrim, Longford,Mayo, Monaghan,Roscommon, Sligoand Westmeath;
and the city of
Galway.
South The counties of: 3
Cork, Kerry,
Limerick, NorthTipperary, SouthTipperary andWaterford;
and the cities of
Cork, Limerick andWaterford.
”.
PART 4
Constituency Commission
9.—The Electoral Act 1997 is amended by substituting the follow-
ing Part for Part II:
“PART II
Constituency Commission
Establishment
ofConstituencyCommission.5.—(1) Upon the publication by the Central
Statistics Office, following a Census of Population,of the Census Report setting out the preliminaryresult of the Census in respect of the total popu-lation of the State there shall be established bythe Minister, by order, a commission (in this Actreferred to as “a Constituency Commission”) toperform the functions assigned to it by this Part.
5Pt.3 S.8
Substitution of Part
II of Electoral Act1997.Pt.4 S.9
6[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(2) A Constituency Commission and its
members shall be independent in the performanceof their functions under this Act.
(3) Every order made under subsection (1)
shall be laid before each House of the Oireachtasas soon as may be after it is made.
Functions of
ConstituencyCommission.6.—(1) It shall be the function of a Constitu-
ency Commission to make a report in relation tothe constituencies for—
(a) the election of members to the Da ´il, and
(b) the election of members of the Euro-
pean Parliament.
(2) In preparing a report under subsection
(1)(a) a Constituency Commission shall, in observ-
ing the relevant provisions of the Constitution inrelation to Da ´il constituencies, have regard to the
following:
(a) the total number of members of the
Da´il, subject to Article 16.2.2 °of the
Constitution, shall be not less than 164and not more than 168;
(b) each constituency shall return 3, 4 or 5
members;
(c) the breaching of county boundaries
shall be avoided as far as practicable;
(d) each constituency shall be composed of
contiguous areas;
(e) there shall be regard to geographic con-
siderations including significant physi-cal features and the extent of and thedensity of population in each constitu-ency; and
(f) subject to the provisions of this section,
the Commission shall endeavour tomaintain continuity in relation to thearrangement of constituencies.
(3) In preparing a report under subsection
(1)(b) a Constituency Commission shall have
regard to the following:
(a) the total number of members of the
European Parliament to be elected inthe State shall be 12 or such othernumber as may be specified for thetime being pursuant to the treaties gov-erning the European Communities;
(b) there shall be reasonable equality of
representation as between constituenc-ies; and[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(c) the matters specified in paragraphs ( b)
to (f) of subsection (2).
(4) The reference in subsection (2)( c) to county
boundaries shall be deemed not to include a refer-ence to the boundary of a city or any boundarybetween any 2 of the counties of Du ´n Laoghaire-
Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin.
Membership of
ConstituencyCommission.7.—A Constituency Commission shall consist of
the following members:
(a) (i) a judge of the Supreme Court, or
(ii) following consultation with the
President of the High Court, ajudge of the High Court,
nominated by the Chief Justice, who
shall be the chairperson of theCommission;
(b) the Ombudsman;
(c) the Secretary General of the Depart-
ment of the Environment, Heritageand Local Government;
(d) the Clerk of the Da ´il; and
(e) the Clerk of the Seanad.
Provisions in
relation tomembers.8.—(1) Where, before the reports of a Con-
stituency Commission have been presented to theChairman of the Da ´il under section 9, the person
appointed to be chairperson of the Commission—
(a) through ill-health or other reasonable
cause becomes unable to act as suchchairperson, the Chief Justice shallassign another judge of the SupremeCourt or, following consultation withthe President of the High Court,another judge of the High Court to bea member and the chairperson of theCommission,
(b) ceases to hold office as a judge of the
Supreme Court or of the High Court,the person shall continue as such chair-person until the reports of the Com-mission have been presented unless theChief Justice assigns another judge ofeither court to be a member and thechairperson of the Commission.
(2) Where the holder of an office referred to in
paragraphs ( b)t o( e) of section 7, through ill-
health or other reasonable cause, is unable to actas a member of a Constituency Commission or anysuch office is vacant, the Minister may appoint, inthe case of—
7Pt.4 S.9Pt.4 S.9
8[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(a) the Ombudsman, the Director General
of the Office of the Ombudsman,
(b) the Secretary General of the Depart-
ment of the Environment, Heritageand Local Government, anotherofficer of the Minister, who is an estab-lished civil servant for the purposes ofthe Civil Service Regulation Acts 1956to 2005,
(c) the Clerk of the Da ´il, the Clerk Assist-
ant of the Da ´il, and
(d) the Clerk of the Seanad, the Clerk
Assistant of the Seanad,
to be a member of the Commission and the person
so appointed shall remain a member of the Com-mission until the reports of the Commission arepresented to the Chairman of the Da ´il under
section 9.
(3) Where, before the reports of a Constituency
Commission have been presented to the Chairmanof the Da ´il under section 9, a person who is a
member of the Commission ceases to hold anoffice referred to in paragraphs ( b)t o( e)o f
section 7, the person shall continue as a memberof the Commission until the reports of the Com-mission have been presented unless the Minister
by order directs that the person’s successor inoffice or the appropriate person referred to in sub-section (2) shall be a member of the Commission.
(4) Subject to subsections (1), (2) and (3), a
Constituency Commission may act notwithstand-ing vacancies in its membership.
Report of
ConstituencyCommission.9.—(1) As soon as may be after publication by
the Central Statistics Office of the Census Reportsetting out the final result of the Census referredto in section 5(1) in respect of the total populationof the State and, in any event, not later than 3months after such publication, the ConstituencyCommission shall present to the Chairman of theDa´il—
(a) a report containing the recom-
mendations of the Commission inrelation to the constituencies for theelection of members to the Da ´il and
any alteration of those constituencieswhich the Commission considersappropriate, and
(b) a report containing the recom-
mendations of the Commission inrelation to the constituencies for theelection of members of the EuropeanParliament and any alteration of those[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
constituencies which the Commission
considers appropriate.
(2) A report of a Constituency Commission
under this section may indicate that, in the opinionof the Commission having regard to subsection (2)or (3) of section 6, no alteration is required to bemade in the constituencies to which the reportrelates.
(3) Upon the presentation by a Constituency
Commission of the reports to be presented underthis section, the Commission shall stand dissolved.
(4) As soon as may be after the receipt of a
report of a Constituency Commission, the Chair-man of the Da ´il shall cause such report to be laid
before each House of the Oireachtas.
Constituency
Commission toinvite andconsidersubmissions.10.—(1) A Constituency Commission shall, as
soon as may be after its establishment, give publicnotice of its intention to make a report relatingto—
(a) the constituencies for the election of
members to the Da ´il, and
(b) the constituencies for the election of
members of the European Parliament.
(2) As soon as may be after its establishment,
a Constituency Commission shall prepare—
(a) a statement setting out the relevant pro-
visions of the Constitution in relationto Da ´il constituencies to which the
Commission is required to have regardin preparing a report under section6(1)( a), and
(b) statements based on the population as
set out in the Census Report settingout the preliminary result of the Cen-sus referred to in section 5(1) inrespect of the total population of theState showing, for the constituenciesfor the time being in force for Da ´il and
European elections, in relation toeach constituency:
(i) the number of members of the Da ´il
or European Parliament, as thecase may be;
(ii) the population of the constituency;
(iii) the population per member of the
Da´il or European Parliament, as
the case may be, of the constitu-ency; and
9Pt.4 S.9Pt.4 S.9
10[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(iv) the percentage variation of popu-
lation per member of the Da ´il or
European Parliament, as the casemay be, of the constituency fromthe national average populationper member.
(3) The public notice referred to in subsection
(1) shall indicate that—
(a) the statements prepared by the Con-
stituency Commission under thissection shall be made available free ofcharge by the Commission, to any per-son wishing to examine them, in suchmanner as shall be specified in thenotice,
(b) any person may make a submission to
the Commission in such manner andwithin such period (which shall be notless than 3 months after the date of thegiving of the notice) as shall be speci-fied in the notice, and
(c) submissions received by the Com-
mission in the manner and within theperiod specified in the notice shall bemade available free of charge by theCommission, to any person wishing toexamine them, in such manner andwithin such period as shall be specifiedin the notice.
(4) The statements prepared by the Constitu-
ency Commission, and any submissions receivedby it, under this section shall be made availablefree of charge by the Commission, to any personwishing to examine them, in accordance with apublic notice referred to in subsection (1).
(5) The Constituency Commission shall con-
sider every submission made to it in accordancewith a public notice referred to in subsection (1).
Staff of and
assistance toConstituencyCommission.11.—(1) The Minister shall make available to a
Constituency Commission such services, includingthe services of staff, as may reasonably be requiredby the Commission.
(2) The Director General of the Central Statis-
tics Office and the Chief Executive Officer of Ord-
nance Survey Ireland shall, on a request beingmade in that behalf, provide free of charge to aConstituency Commission such assistance as theCommission may reasonably require for the pur-pose of the performance of its functions.
Expenses of
ConstituencyCommission.12.—The reasonable expenses of a Constituency
Commission, including the travelling and otherexpenses of the members of the Commission,shall, subject to such conditions as the Ministerwith the consent of the Minister for Finance may[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
determine, be paid out of moneys provided by
the Oireachtas.
Procedure of
ConstituencyCommission.13.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a
Constituency Commission shall regulate its ownprocedure.
Prohibition on
disclosure ofinformation.14.—(1) No person shall, without the consent
of a Constituency Commission, disclose to anyperson any information obtained while serving as(or during service as) a member of the Com-mission or as a person whose services are madeavailable to the Commission under section 11 rela-tive to the business of the Commission or the per-formance of the functions of the Commission.
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1)
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable onsummary conviction to a fine not exceeding\5,000.
Prohibition of
certain co-mmunications.15.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 10,
it shall not be lawful for any person to communi-cate with the members of or staff whose servicesare made available to a Constituency Commissionunder section 11 for the purposes of influencingthe Commission in carrying out its functions.
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1)
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable onsummary conviction to a fine not exceeding\5,000.”.
PART 5
European Parliament Elections
10.—The European Parliament Elections Act 1997 is amended by
substituting the following sections for sections 12 and 13:
“Nomination
of candidatesandreplacementcandidates.12.—(1) At a European election a person may
nominate himself or herself as a candidate or may,with his or her consent, be nominated by anotherperson (being a person registered as a Europeanelector in the constituency for which the personproposes to nominate the candidate) as proposer.
(2) In the case of a candidate whose candi-
dature is not authenticated by a certificate of pol-itical affiliation under rule 5(3) of the SecondSchedule, one or other of the following paragraphsshall, before the expiration of the time appointedby this Act for receiving nominations, be com-plied with:
(a) the candidate’s nomination shall have
been assented to by 60 persons(excluding the candidate and anyproposer) who are registered as Euro-pean electors in the constituency (each
11Pt.4 S.9
Substitution of
sections 12 and 13of EuropeanParliamentElections Act 1997.Pt.5 S.10
12[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
of whom in this Act is referred to as
an ‘assentor’);
(b) the candidate, or someone on his or her
behalf, shall have made a deposit inaccordance with section 13.
(3) The following provisions apply in respect of
the assents required by subsection (2)( a) to the
nomination of a candidate referred to in thatsubsection:
(a) to assent to the nomination, an assentor
shall make a statutory declaration inthe prescribed form stating thefollowing:
(i) his or her number (including pol-
ling district letters) on the registerof European electors in force onthe date of the making of thestatutory declaration;
(ii) his or her place of ordinary resi-
dence in respect of which he orshe is registered in the register ofEuropean electors referred to insubparagraph (i);
(iii) his or her contact details, including
telephone numbers (if any);
(iv) the name of the European Parlia-
ment constituency, on the date ofthe making of the statutory declar-ation, in which he or she is ordi-narily resident;
(v) the name and address of the
candidate;
(vi) the form of identification produced
by him or her in accordance withparagraph ( b), including any
number on it that distinguishes itfrom similar forms held by others;
(vii) that he or she assents to the nomi-
nation of the candidate;
(viii) that he or she has not assented to
the nomination of any other can-didate in respect of that Euro-pean election;
(b) when making the statutory declaration
referred to in paragraph ( a), the
assentor shall produce to the persontaking and receiving the declaration aprescribed photographic identificationand shall, on so doing, be deemed, forthe purposes of the Statutory Declar-ations Act 1938, to be personally[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
known to the person taking and receiv-
ing the declaration;
(c) the assent shall have effect as respects,
and only as respects, the EuropeanParliament constituency in which theplace referred to in paragraph ( a)(ii)
is situate at the time of the Europeanelection concerned;
(d) subject to paragraph ( e), the assent shall
have effect as respects, and only asrespects, the European election in theconstituency referred to in paragraph(c) held next after the making of the
statutory declaration;
(e) notwithstanding paragraph ( d), the
assent shall cease to have effect if theregister of European electors referredto in paragraph ( a) ceases to be in
force before the holding of the Euro-pean election referred to in paragraph(d);
(f) the candidate or proposer shall attach
the required number of statutory dec-larations (that is to say, the 60 statu-tory declarations constituting theassents) to the nomination paper andthe nomination paper delivered to thereturning officer in accordance withrule 11 of the Second Schedule shallhave the declarations so attached;
(g) where more than the required number
of statutory declarations is attached tothe nomination paper, the declarations(up to the required number) firstattached to the nomination paper shallbe taken into account to the exclusionof any others;
(h) it shall be lawful for a member of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na or an official of the
registration authority to take andreceive a statutory declaration referredto in paragraph ( a) and any such dec-
laration shall be stamped by themember or official concerned;
(i) a registration authority and a returning
officer shall arrange for the provisionof forms for the purposes of making astatutory declaration referred to inparagraph ( a) free of charge to any
person who requests such a form.
(4) For the purposes of subsections (2)( a) and
(3), a person whose application to have his or hername entered in a supplement to the register ofEuropean electors is approved by the registrationauthority at or before the latest time for delivery
13Pt.5 S.10Pt.5 S.10
14[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
of a nomination paper to the returning officer shall
be deemed to be registered as a European electorin the applicable constituency.
(5) At a European election—
(a) a registered political party, and
(b) a person who in relation to the election
is a non-party candidate,
may, subject to and in accordance with rules 17,
18 and 19 of the Second Schedule, nominate oneor more persons, with the consent of the personor persons concerned, to be as regards the electionreplacement candidates.
(6) Subject to rule 17( b) of the Second Sched-
ule, a person who is a candidate at a Europeanelection shall be eligible for nomination as areplacement candidate.
(7) At a European election a person may not
be nominated as a candidate or as a replacementcandidate in respect of more than one con-stituency.
Deposit by
certaincandidates.13.—(1) This section applies to a candidate
referred to in section 12(2) unless the candidateconcerned has opted to have his or her nominationassented to by the means specified in section12(2)( a) and (3).
(2) A candidate at a European election
referred to in section 12(2), or someone on his orher behalf, may, before the expiration of the timeappointed by this Act for receiving nominations,deposit with the returning officer the sum of\1,800, and if he or she fails to do so, his or her
candidature shall be deemed to have beenwithdrawn.
(3) The deposit that may be made by or on
behalf of a candidate pursuant to this section maybe made by means of legal tender or, with the con-sent of the returning officer, in any other manner.
Return or
disposal ofdeposit.13A.—(1) The deposit referred to in section 13
shall be returned where the candidate—
(a) withdraws his or her candidature in
accordance with rule 15 of the SecondSchedule,
(b) dies before the poll is closed,
(c) has not, before the expiration of the
time for the receipt of nominations,been validly nominated as a candidate,
(d) is elected, or[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(e) is not elected but the greatest number
of votes credited to him or her at anystage of the counting of the votes at theEuropean election exceeds one quarterof the quota.
(2) Any deposit which is not returned under
the foregoing subsection shall be forfeited.
(3) Where a deposit is to be returned under
subsection (1) it shall be returned to the person bywhom it was made, provided that a deposit madeby a person who dies before the deposit isreturned shall be returned to the personal rep-resentative of that person.
(4) A deposit forfeited under this section shall
be disposed of by the returning officer in suchmanner as may be directed by the Minister forFinance.
(5) In this section ‘personal representative’ has
the meaning assigned to it by section 3 of the Suc-cession Act 1965.”.
11.—The Second Schedule to the European Parliament Elections
Act 1997 is amended by substituting the following rules for rules 2to 5:
“Notice of
election.2.—The returning officer shall, not later than
the twenty-eighth day (disregarding any excludedday) before the polling day, give public notice inthe form directed by the Minister of the Europeanelection (in this Schedule referred to as the ‘noticeof election’) stating—
(a) the times for receiving nominations,
(b) the requirement on candidates referred
to in section 12(2) to secure 60 assentsor make a deposit in accordance with
section 13,
(c) the times and place at which nomination
papers, replacement candidates listsand the forms of statutory declarationreferred to in rule 6 may be obtained,
(d) the times and place at which the
returning officer will attend to receivenominations, and
(e) the day and the period fixed for the
holding of the poll if the election iscontested.
Register of
PoliticalParties.3.—On the day (disregarding any excluded day)
before the latest date for the publication of thenotice of election, the Registrar of Political Parties
15Pt.5 S.10
Substitution of rules
2 to 5 of SecondSchedule toEuropeanParliamentElections Act 1997.Pt.5 S.11
16[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
shall send to each returning officer a copy of the
Register of Political Parties.
Necessity for
nomination.4.—A person shall not be entitled to have his or
her name inserted in a ballot paper as a candidateat a European election unless that person has beennominated in the manner provided by this Act andthe person’s nomination paper has been ruled asvalid by the returning officer.
Nomination of
candidates.5.—(1) Each candidate shall be nominated by a
separate nomination paper in the prescribed form.The form of nomination paper may include—
(a) a note of the qualifications, disqualifi-
cations and incapacities as regardselection to and membership of theParliament,
(b) a note of the provisions that apply
under this Act to the nomination of acandidate referred to in section 12(2),including—
(i) the fact that a candidate referred to
in section 12(2) may either followthe procedure for assenting undersection 12(2)( a) and (3) or make a
deposit under section 13,
(ii) the procedure for assenting under
section 12(2)( a) and (3), and
(iii) the procedure for making a deposit
under section 13,
(c) a form of statement indicating whether
the candidate is—
(i) a citizen of Ireland or a British citi-
zen, or
(ii) a national of a Member State, other
than the State or the UnitedKingdom,
and
(d) a form of declaration, to be signed by
the candidate or the candidate’s pro-poser, that he or she has read the notereferred to in paragraph ( a) and
believes that—
(i) the information furnished in the
nomination paper is correct in allmaterial respects, and
(ii) the candidate is eligible for elec-
tion, has consented to the nomi-nation, does not stand validlynominated in respect of any other[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
constituency and is not a candi-
date at the election in any otherMember State.
(2) Each nomination paper shall state the
names (the surname being stated first) and theaddress and the occupation (if any) of thecandidate.
(3) ( a) A candidate may include in the nomi-
nation paper the name of the regis-tered political party of which he or sheis a candidate or the name of such pol-itical party together with the name ofany political group noted on the Regis-ter of Political Parties in relation tothat political party, provided that, atthe time the nomination paper is deliv-ered to the returning officer, a certifi-cate in the form directed by the Mini-ster (in this Schedule referred to as a‘certificate of political affiliation’)authenticating the candidature is pro-duced to the returning officer, being acertificate signed by the officer orofficers of such party whose name ornames appear in the said Register pur-suant to section 25(7)( d) of the Act of
1992. Where such a certificate is pro-duced, the returning officer, providedhe or she is satisfied that it is appro-priate to do so in relation to the candi-date, shall cause—
(i) a statement of the name of the rel-
evant political party and a copy ofthe political party’s emblem asregistered in the said Register tobe specified in relation to the can-didate on all the ballot papers, and
(ii) a statement of the name of the rel-
evant political party to be speci-fied in relation to the candidateon notices.
(b) Where a candidate includes in the nomi-
nation paper a statement of the nameof a political group in addition to thename of a political party, the returningofficer, provided he or she is satisfiedthat it is appropriate to do so inrelation to the candidate, shall cause astatement of the name of such politicalgroup in addition to the name of suchparty to be specified on all such ballotpapers and notices.
(4) Where a candidate is not the candidate of
a registered political party, the candidate shall beentitled to enter after his or her name on thenomination paper the expression ‘Non-Party’ and,if the candidate does so, the returning officer shall
17Pt.5 S.11Pt.5 S.11
Substitution of rule
13 of SecondSchedule toEuropeanParliamentElections Act 1997.
18[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
cause a statement of that expression to be speci-
fied in relation to the candidate on all the ballotpapers and on notices.
(5) A person to whom paragraph (4) applies
may include in the nomination paper the name ofany political group formed in accordance with therules of procedure of the Parliament of which heor she is a member, provided that, at the time thenomination paper is delivered to the returningofficer, a certificate (in this Schedule referred toas a ‘certificate of European political affiliation’)is also produced to the returning officer, being acertificate signed by a member of the Secretariatof the relevant political group that the person inquestion is a member of the political group formedin accordance with the rules of procedure of theParliament and named in the certificate. Wheresuch a certificate is produced, the returningofficer, provided he or she is satisfied that it isappropriate to do so in relation to the candidate,shall cause a statement of the name of such politi-cal group, in addition, where appropriate, to theexpression ‘Non-Party’, to be specified in relationto the candidate on all the ballot papers and onnotices.
(6) Every reference in this rule to the Register
of Political Parties shall be construed as a refer-ence to the copy of that Register sent to thereturning officer pursuant to rule 3.”.
12.—The Second Schedule to the European Parliament Elections
Act 1997 is amended by substituting the following rule for rule 13:
“Ruling on
validity ofnominationpapers.13.—(1) ( a) The returning officer shall rule on
the validity of each nomination paperwithin one hour after its delivery tohim or her and, subject to paragraph(d), may rule that it is invalid if, but
only if, he or she considers that thepaper is not properly made out orsigned.
(b) Without prejudice to paragraphs ( a) and
(d), the returning officer may also rule
that the nomination paper of a candi-date referred to in section 12(2)( a)i s
invalid if he or she considers that theprovisions of section 12(2)( a) and (3)
have not been complied with.
(c) The returning officer shall not rule that
a nomination paper is invalid becausean assentor has assented to the nomi-nation of more than one candidate atthe same European election.
(d) The returning officer shall rule invalid
any nomination paper relating to aperson referred to in rule 6(1) which isnot accompanied by both the statutory[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
declaration and the attestation
referred to in that rule or where itappears to the returning officer thatthe said declaration or attestation doesnot conform with the said rule 6.
(2) The candidate nominated by each nomi-
nation paper and the candidate’s proposer, if any,and one other person designated by the candidateor proposer, as the case may be, and no other per-son, except with the permission of the returningofficer, shall be entitled to attend while the saidnomination paper is being ruled upon by thereturning officer.
(3) The returning officer shall object to the
name of a candidate in a nomination paper ifsuch name—
(a) is not a name by which the candidate is
commonly known,
(b) is misleading and likely to cause
confusion,
(c) is unduly long, or
(d) contains a political reference,
and where the returning officer so objects, he or
she shall allow the candidate or proposer, as maybe appropriate, to amend the name and, if it is notso amended to the returning officer’s satisfaction,the returning officer may amend it, as he or shethinks fit, after consultation with the candidate orproposer, if either is present, or may rule that thenomination paper is invalid as not being properlymade out.
(4) The returning officer shall object to the
description of a candidate in a nomination paperwhich is, in the opinion of the returning officer,incorrect, insufficient to identify the candidate orunnecessarily long or which contains a politicalreference other than, where appropriate, a refer-ence to a public or elected office held, or formerlyheld, by the candidate or an entry made pursuantto paragraph (3), (4) or (5) of rule 5. Where areturning officer so objects, he or she shall allowthe candidate or proposer, as may be appropriate,to amend the description and, if it is not soamended to the returning officer’s satisfaction, thereturning officer may amend or delete it, as he orshe thinks fit, after consultation with the candidateor proposer, if either is present, or may rule thatthe nomination paper is invalid as not being prop-erly made out.
(5) Having ruled on the validity of a nomi-
nation paper, the returning officer shall put a noteof the decision on the nomination paper and shall
sign the note. If the returning officer rules that the
19Pt.5 S.12Pt.5 S.12
Amendment of
rules 17 and 88 ofSecond Schedule toEuropeanParliamentElections Act 1997.
Amendment of
Schedule toElectoral Act 1997.
20[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
paper is invalid, the officer shall include a state-
ment of the reasons for the decision. The decisionof the returning officer under this rule shall befinal subject only to reversal on a petition ques-tioning the election.
(6) As soon as practicable after ruling on the
validity of a nomination paper, the returningofficer shall give, by post or otherwise, notice inwriting of the ruling to the candidate.
(7) Every person in respect of whom a nomi-
nation paper has, under this rule, been determinedto be valid and whose candidature is not with-drawn in accordance with rule 15 or is not deemedunder section 13(2) or rule 27(1) to have beenwithdrawn shall stand validly nominated as acandidate.”.
13.—The Second Schedule to the European Parliament Elections
Act 1997 is amended—
(a) in rule 17—
(i) in paragraph ( a)(i) by substituting “six” for “four”,
and
(ii) in paragraph ( a)(ii) by substituting “four” for
“three”,
and
(b) in rule 88 by substituting the following paragraph for para-
graph (3):
“(3) When the last vacancies can be filled under this
rule, no further transfer of votes shall be made unless anyof the continuing candidates has not been credited with anumber of votes exceeding one quarter of the quota andit is necessary for the purposes of section 21 of the Elec-toral Act 1997 or section 13A(1)( e) to make such transfer
in order to establish whether such a number of votes couldbe credited to that candidate.”.
14.—The Schedule to the Electoral Act 1997 is amended by substi-
tuting the following subparagraphs for subparagraphs ( d) and ( dd)
of paragraph 2:
“(d) necessary travelling and other expenses incurred by a
candidate or an assentor in meeting the require-ments of subsections (5)( a) and (6) of section 46 of
the Act of 1992 and subsections (2)( a) and (3) of
section 12 of the Act of 1997,
(dd) the payment by or on behalf of a candidate of a
deposit under section 47 of the Act of 1992 andsection 13 of the Act of 1997,”.[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
PART 6
Local Elections
15.—The Local Elections Regulations are amended by substituting
the following articles for articles 11 to 20:
“Notice of
election.11.—The returning officer shall, not later than
the twenty-eighth day before the polling day, givepublic notice of the election (in these Regulationsreferred to as the ‘notice of election’) stating:
(a) the times for receiving nominations;
(b) the requirement on candidates referred
to in article 14(7) to secure 15 assentsor make a deposit in accordance witharticle 15;
(c) the times and place at which nomination
papers may be obtained;
(d) the times and place at which the
returning officer will attend to receivenominations; and
(e) the day and the period fixed for the
holding of the poll if the election iscontested.
Register of
politicalparties.12.—On the day (disregarding any excluded
day) before the latest day for the publication ofthe notice of election, the Registrar of PoliticalParties shall send to each returning officer a copyof the Register of Political Parties.
Necessity for
nomination.13.—A person shall not be entitled to have his
or her name entered in a ballot paper as a candi-date at an election unless that person has beennominated in the manner provided by these Regu-lations and the person’s nomination paper hasbeen ruled as valid by the returning officer.
Nomination of
candidates.14.—(1) At an election a person may nominate
himself or herself as a candidate or may, with hisor her consent, be nominated by another person(being a person registered as an elector in the areaof the local authority for which the person pro-poses to nominate the candidate) as proposer.
(2) Each candidate shall be nominated by a
separate nomination paper in the form directed bythe Minister.
(3) A separate nomination paper shall be
required for each local electoral area for which acandidate is nominated.
(4) Each nomination paper shall state the
names (the surname being stated first) and theaddress and occupation (if any) of the candidate.
21Substitution of
articles 11 to 20 ofLocal ElectionsRegulations.Pt.6 S.15
22[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(5) A candidate may include in the nomination
paper the name of the political party registered inthe Register of Political Parties as a party organ-ised to contest a local election of which he or sheis a candidate, provided that, at the time the nomi-nation paper is delivered to the returning officer,a certificate in the form specified in Part II of theSchedule (in these Regulations referred to as a‘certificate of political affiliation’) authenticatingthe candidature is produced to the returningofficer, being a certificate signed by the officer orofficers of such party whose name or namesappear in the said Register pursuant to section25(7)( d) of the Act of 1992. Where such a certifi-
cate is produced, the returning officer, providedhe or she is satisfied that it is appropriate to do soin relation to the candidate, shall cause—
(a) a statement of the name of the relevant
political party and a copy of the politi-cal party’s emblem as registered in thesaid Register to be specified in relationto the candidate on all the ballot pap-ers, and
(b) a statement of the name of the relevant
political party to be specified inrelation to the candidate on notices.
(6) Where a candidate is not the candidate of a
political party registered in the Register of Politi-cal Parties as a party organised to contest a localelection the candidate shall be entitled to enterafter his or her name on the nomination paper theexpression ‘Non-Party’ and, if the candidate doesso, the returning officer shall cause a statement ofthat expression to be specified in relation to thecandidate on all the ballot papers and on notices.
(7) In the case of a candidate whose candi-
dature is not authenticated by a certificate of pol-itical affiliation under sub-article (5), one or otherof the following paragraphs shall, before the expir-ation of the time appointed by these Regulationsfor receiving nominations, be complied with:
(a) the candidate’s nomination shall have
been assented to by 15 persons(excluding the candidate and anyproposer) who are electors in the localelectoral area (each of whom in thisPart is referred to as an ‘assentor’);
(b) the candidate, or someone on his or her
behalf, shall have made a deposit inaccordance with article 15.
(8) The following provisions apply in respect of
the assents required by sub-article (7)( a) to the
nomination of a candidate referred to in thatsub-article:[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(a) to assent to the nomination, an assentor
shall make a statutory declaration inthe form directed by the Minister stat-ing the following:
(i) his or her number (including pol-
ling district letters) on the registerof local government electors inforce on the date of the making ofthe statutory declaration;
(ii) his or her place of ordinary resi-
dence in respect of which he orshe is registered in the register oflocal government electors referredto in sub-paragraph (i);
(iii) his or her contact details, including
telephone numbers (if any);
(iv) the name of the local electoral area,
on the date of the making of thestatutory declaration, in which heor she is ordinarily resident;
(v) the name and address of the
candidate;
(vi) the form of identification produced
by him or her in accordance withparagraph ( b), including any
number on it that distinguishes itfrom similar forms held by others;
(vii) that he or she assents to the nomi-
nation of the candidate;
(viii) that he or she has not assented to
the nomination of any other can-didate in respect of that election;
(b) when making the statutory declaration
referred to in paragraph ( a), the
assentor shall produce to the persontaking and receiving the declaration aspecified photographic identification inaccordance with sub-article (9)( b) and
shall, on so doing, be deemed, for thepurposes of the Statutory DeclarationsAct 1938, to be personally known tothe person taking and receiving thedeclaration;
(c) the assent shall have effect as respects,
and only as respects, the local electoralarea in which the place referred to inparagraph ( a)(ii) is situate at the time
of the election concerned;
(d) subject to paragraph ( e), the assent shall
have effect as respects, and only asrespects, the election in the local elec-toral area referred to in paragraph ( c)
23Pt.6 S.15Pt.6 S.15
24[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
held next after the making of the statu-
tory declaration;
(e) notwithstanding paragraph ( d), the
assent shall cease to have effect if theregister of local government electorsreferred to in paragraph ( a) ceases to
be in force before the holding of theelection referred to in paragraph ( d);
(f) the candidate or proposer shall attach
the required number of statutory dec-larations (that is to say, the 15 statu-tory declarations constituting theassents) to the nomination paper andthe nomination paper delivered to thereturning officer in accordance witharticle 18 shall have the declarationsso attached;
(g) where more than the required number
of statutory declarations is attached tothe nomination paper, the declarations(up to the required number) firstattached to the nomination paper shallbe taken into account to the exclusionof any others;
(h) it shall be lawful for a member of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na or an official of the
registration authority to take andreceive a statutory declaration referredto in paragraph ( a) and any such dec-
laration shall be stamped by themember or official concerned;
(i) a registration authority and a returning
officer shall arrange for the provisionof forms for the purposes of making astatutory declaration referred to inparagraph ( a) free of charge to any
person who requests such a form.
(9) For the purposes of sub-articles (7)( a) and
(8)—
(a) a person whose application to have his
or her name entered in the supplementto the register of local governmentelectors is approved by the registrationauthority at or before the latest timefor delivery of a nomination paper tothe returning officer shall be deemedto be an elector in the applicable localelectoral area, and
(b) any type of photographic identification
that for the time being is prescribedunder section 3 of the Act of 1992 forthe purposes of section 46(6)( b) of that
Act is considered to be ‘specifiedphotographic identification’ as referredto in sub-article (8)( b).[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(10) The returning officer shall provide nomi-
nation papers during the usual office hours of thelocal authority, at such place or places as arenamed in the notice of election, on each day onwhich the offices of the local authority are openfor public business, during the period beginning onthe publication of that notice and ending at 12noon on the latest day for receiving nominationsand the returning officer shall supply a nominationpaper or papers free of charge to any personapplying therefor, but the use of a paper suppliedby the returning officer pursuant to this articleshall not be obligatory at an election, providedthat the nomination paper used at the election isin the form directed by the Minister in accordancewith article 14(2).
(11) Every reference in this article to the Regis-
ter of Political Parties shall be construed as a refer-ence to the copy of that Register sent to thereturning officer pursuant to article 12.
Deposit by
certaincandidates.15.—(1) This article applies to a candidate
referred to in article 14(7) unless the candidateconcerned has opted to have his or her nominationassented to by the means specified in article14(7)( a) and 14(8).
(2) A candidate at an election referred to in
article 14(7), or someone on his or her behalf,may, before the expiration of the time appointedby these Regulations for receiving nominations,deposit with the returning officer in respect ofeach local electoral area for which the candidateis nominated the appropriate sum specified in sub-article (3), and if the said sum is not deposited inrespect of any such local electoral area, the candi-dature of the candidate for that local electoral areashall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
(3) The amount of the deposit shall be \100 in
the case of an election of members of a county orcity council and \50 in the case of any other
election.
(4) The deposit that may be made by or on
behalf of a candidate pursuant to this article maybe made by means of legal tender or, with the con-sent of the returning officer, in any other manner.
Return or
disposal ofdeposit.16.—(1) The deposit made by or on behalf of a
candidate in respect of a local electoral area shallbe returned where the candidate—
(a) withdraws his or her candidature in
accordance with article 22 in respect ofthe local electoral area,
(b) is deemed, under article 25(2) or article
28(1), to have withdrawn his or hercandidature in respect of the local elec-toral area,
25Pt.6 S.15Pt.6 S.15
26[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(c) dies before the poll is closed,
(d) has not, before the expiration of the
time for the receipt of nominations,been validly nominated as a candidatefor the local electoral area,
(e) is elected, or
(f) is not elected but the greatest number
of votes credited to him or her at anystage of the counting of the votes inrespect of the local electoral areaexceeds one quarter of the quota.
(2) Any deposit which is not returned under
sub-article (1) shall be forfeited.
(3) Where a deposit is to be returned under
sub-article (1) it shall be returned to the person bywhom it was made, provided that a deposit madeby a person who dies before the deposit isreturned shall be returned to his or her personalrepresentative.
(4) A deposit forfeited under this article shall
be applied by the returning officer towards his orher expenses in conducting the election and shallbe accounted for by the returning officeraccordingly.
(5) In this article ‘personal representative’ has
the meaning assigned to it by section 3 of the Suc-cession Act 1965.
Times for
receivingnominations.17.—The earliest time for receiving nominations
shall be 10 a.m. on the day (disregarding anyexcluded day) next following the latest day for thepublication of the notice of election and the latesttime for receiving nominations shall be 12 noon onthe seventh day (disregarding any excluded day)next following the latest day for the publication ofthat notice.
Delivery of
nominationpapers.18.—(1) Every nomination paper shall be deliv-
ered to the returning officer within the times speci-fied in article 17, by the candidate or the proposerof the candidate.
(2) The delivery of the nomination paper shall
be made by the candidate in person except that,where the candidate is proposed by another per-son, it may be made either as aforesaid or by theproposer in person.
(3) The returning officer shall attend to receive
nominations at the place specified in that behalf inthe notice of election between the hours of 10 a.m.and 12 noon and between the hours of 2 p.m. and5 p.m. on the day (disregarding any excluded day)before the latest day for receiving nominations[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
and between the hours of 10 a.m. and 12 noon on
such latest day.
Selection of
nominationpapers.19.—The returning officer shall number the
nomination papers in the order in which they arereceived and the first valid nomination paperreceived by the returning officer nominating a can-didate for election for a local electoral area shallbe deemed to be the nomination of that candidatefor that local electoral area.
Ruling on
validity ofnominationpapers.20.—(1) ( a) The returning officer shall rule on
the validity of each nomination paperwithin one hour after its delivery andmay rule that it is invalid if, but onlyif, the returning officer considers thatthe paper is not properly made out orsigned.
(b) Without prejudice to paragraph ( a), the
returning officer may also rule that thenomination paper of a candidatereferred to in article 14(7)( a) is invalid
if he or she considers that the pro-visions of sub-articles (7)( a) and (8) of
article 14 have not been complied with.
(c) The returning officer shall not rule that
a nomination paper is invalid becausean assentor has assented to the nomi-nation of more than one candidate atthe same election.
(2) The candidate nominated by each nomi-
nation paper and the candidate’s proposer, if any,and one other person designated by the candidateor proposer, as the case may be, and no other per-son, except with the permission of the returningofficer, shall be entitled to attend while the saidnomination paper is being ruled upon by thereturning officer.
(3) The returning officer shall object to the
name of a candidate in a nomination paper ifsuch name—
(a) is not a name by which the candidate is
commonly known,
(b) is misleading and likely to cause
confusion,
(c) is unduly long, or
(d) contains a political reference,
and where the returning officer so objects, he or
she shall allow the candidate or proposer, as maybe appropriate, to amend the name and, if it is notso amended to the returning officer’s satisfaction,the returning officer may amend it, as he or shethinks fit, after consultation with the candidate or
27Pt.6 S.15Pt.6 S.15
Amendment of
article 83 of LocalElectionsRegulations.
28[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
proposer, if either is present, or may rule that the
nomination paper is invalid as not being properlymade out.
(4) The returning officer shall object to the
description of a candidate in a nomination paperwhich is, in the opinion of the returning officer,incorrect, insufficient to identify the candidate orunnecessarily long or which contains a politicalreference other than, where appropriate, a refer-ence to a public or elected office held, or formerlyheld, by the candidate or an entry made pursuantto sub-article (5) or (6) of article 14. Where thereturning officer so objects, he or she shall allowthe candidate or proposer, as may be appropriate,to amend the description and, if it is not soamended to the returning officer’s satisfaction, thereturning officer may amend or delete it, as he or
she thinks fit, after consultation with the candidateor proposer, if either is present, or may rule thatthe nomination paper is invalid as not being prop-erly made out.
(5) Having ruled on the validity of a nomi-
nation paper, the returning officer shall note thedecision on the nomination paper and shall signthe note. If the returning officer rules that thepaper is invalid, the officer shall include a state-ment of the reasons for the decision. The decisionof the returning officer under this article shall befinal subject only to reversal on a petition ques-tioning the election.
(6) As soon as practicable after ruling on the
validity of a nomination paper, the returningofficer shall give, by post or otherwise, notice inwriting of the ruling to the candidate.
(7) Every person in respect of whom a nomi-
nation paper has, under this article, been deter-mined to be valid and whose candidature is notwithdrawn in accordance with article 22 or is notdeemed under article 15(2), 25(2) or 28(1) to havebeen withdrawn shall stand validly nominated asa candidate.”.
16.—The Local Elections Regulations are amended by substituting
the following sub-article for sub-article (8) of article 83:
“(8) The returning officer shall not transfer the surplus of a
candidate deemed to be elected whenever that surplus, togetherwith any other surplus not transferred, is less than both the dif-ference between the quota and the number of votes credited tothe highest continuing candidate and the difference between thenumbers of the votes credited to the two lowest continuing can-didates and, in cases where the lowest candidate, or someone onhis or her behalf, made a deposit in accordance with article 15at the election concerned, either—
(a) the number of votes credited to the lowest candidate
is greater than one quarter of the quota, or[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(b) the sum of the number of votes credited to the lowest
candidate together with that surplus and any othersurplus not transferred is not greater than one quar-ter of the quota.”.
17.—The Local Elections Regulations are amended by substituting
the following sub-article for sub-article (2) of article 84:
“(2) Where the total of the votes of the two or more lowest
candidates, together with any surplus not transferred, is less thanthe number of votes credited to the next highest candidate, thereturning officer shall in one operation exclude such two ormore lowest candidates provided that—
(a) in cases where the second lowest candidate, or some-
one on his or her behalf, made a deposit in accord-ance with article 15 at the election concerned, thenumber of votes credited to that candidate is greaterthan one quarter of the quota, or
(b) in cases where any one of such two or more lowest
candidates, or someone on his or her behalf, made adeposit in accordance with article 15 at the electionconcerned and the number of votes credited to anysuch candidate does not exceed one quarter of thequota, it is clear that the exclusion of the candidatesseparately in accordance with sub-article (1) and thetransfer of any untransferred surplus could not resultin a number of votes exceeding one quarter of thequota being credited to that candidate.”.
18.—The Local Elections Regulations are amended by inserting
the following sub-article after sub-article (2) of article 86:
“(3) When the last vacancies can be filled under this article,
no further transfer of votes shall be made unless any of the con-tinuing candidates has not been credited with a number of votesexceeding one quarter of the quota and it is necessary for thepurposes of article 16(1)( f) to make such transfer in order to
establish whether such a number of votes could be credited tothat candidate.”.
19.—The Local Elections (Disclosure of Donations and
Expenditure) Act 1999 is amended in section 6(1)( b) by substituting
the following subparagraph for subparagraph (i):
“(i) (I) necessary travelling and other expenses
incurred by a candidate or an assentor inmeeting the requirements of article14(7)( a) and (8) of the Local Elections
Regulations 1995 (S.I. No. 297 of 1995), or
(II) the payment by or on behalf of a candidate
of a deposit under article 15 of the LocalElections Regulations 1995 (S.I. No. 297of 1995);”.
20.—(1) The Local Elections Regulations shall have statutory
effect as if they were an Act of the Oireachtas.
29Pt.6 S.16
Amendment of
article 84 of LocalElectionsRegulations.
Amendment of
article 86 of LocalElectionsRegulations.
Amendment of
Local Elections(Disclosure ofDonations andExpenditure) Act1999.
Confirmation of
Local ElectionsRegulations.Pt.6 S.20
Section 4.
30[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
(2) If subsection (1) would, but for this subsection, conflict with a
constitutional right of any person, the operation of subsection (1)
shall be subject to such limitation as is necessary to secure that itdoes not so conflict but shall otherwise be of full force and effect.
SCHEDULE
Number ofName AreaMembers
Carlow- The county of Kilkenny and the county of Five
Kilkenny Carlow, except the part thereof which is
comprised in the constituency of Wicklow.
Cavan- The counties of Cavan and Monaghan. FiveMonaghan
Clare The county of Clare, except the part thereof Four
which is comprised in the constituency ofLimerick City.
Cork East In the county of Cork the electoral divisions Four
of:
Cobh Rural, Knockraha, in the former Rural
District of Cork ;
Aghern, Ballyhooly, Ballynoe, Castlecooke,
Castle Hyde, Castlelyons, Castletownroche,Coole, Curraglass, Fermoy Rural, GlanworthEast, Glanworth West, Gortnaskehy,Gortroe, Kilcor, Kilcummer, Killathy,Kilworth, Knockmourne, Leitrim,Rathcormack, in the former Rural District of
Fermoy ;
Ballyclogh, Buttevant, Caherduggan, Carrig,
Clenor, Doneraile, Kilmaclenine, MallowRural, Monanimy, Shanballymore,Skahanagh, Wallstown, in the former Rural
District of Mallow ;
Ballintemple, Ballycottin, Ballyspillane,
Carrigtohill, Castlemartyr, Clonmult,Cloyne, Corkbeg, Dangan, Dungourney,Garryvoe, Ightermurragh, Inch, Lisgoold,Midleton Rural, Mogeely, Rostellan,Templebodan, Templenacarriga, in theformer Rural District of Midleton ;
Ballyarthur, Derryvillane, Farahy,
Kildorrery, Kilgullane, Kilphelan,Marshalstown, Mitchelstown, Templemolaga,in the former Rural District of Mitchelstown
No. 1 ;
Ardagh, Clonpriest, Kilcronat, Killeagh,
Kilmacdonagh, Youghal Rural, in the formerRural District of Youghal No. 1 ;
and the towns of Cobh, Fermoy, Mallow,
Midleton and Youghal.
Cork North- In the city of Cork the electoral divisions of: FourCentral
Blackpool A, Blackpool B, Churchfield,
Commons, Fair Hill A, Fair Hill B, Fair HillC, Farranferris A, Farranferris B,Farranferris C, Gurranebraher A,Gurranebraher B, Gurranebraher C,Gurranebraher D, Gurranebraher E,Knocknaheeny, Mayfield, Montenotte A,Montenotte B, St. Patrick’s A, St. Patrick’sB, St. Patrick’s C, Shanakiel, Shandon A,Shandon B, Sunday’s Well A, Sunday’s Well[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
B, The Glen A, The Glen B, Tivoli A,
Tivoli B;
and, in the county of Cork, the electoral
divisions of:
Ballynaglogh, Blackpool, Blarney, Caherlag,
Carrignavar, Carrigrohane Beg, Dripsey,Firmount, Glenville, Greenfort, Killeagh,Knockantota, Matehy, Rathcooney,Riverstown, St. Mary’s, Whitechurch, in theformer Rural District of Cork;
Carrig, Kildinan, Watergrasshill, in the
former Rural District of Fermoy ;
Gowlane, Kilcullen, Mountrivers, in the
former Rural District of Macroom ;
Ballynamona, Dromore, Kilshannig, Rahan,
in the former Rural District of Mallow .
Cork North- In the county of Cork the electoral divisions Three
West of:
Ballygroman, Ballymurphy, Bengour,
Brinny, Kilbonane, Knockavilly, Moviddy,Murragh, Teadies, Templemartin, in theformer Rural District of Bandon ;
Ballincollig, Ovens, in the former Rural
District of Cork ;
Aultagh, Bealock, Be ´al A´tha an
Ghaorthaidh, Carrigboy, Castletown,Coolmountain, Garrown, Kinneigh, Manch,Teerelton, in the former Rural District of
Dunmanway ;
Allow, Ballyhoolahan, Banteer, Barleyhill,
Barnacurra, Bawncross, Boherboy,Castlecor, Castlemagner, Clonfert East,Clonfert West, Clonmeen, Coolclogh,Dromina, Glenlara, Gortmore, Greenane,Kanturk, Kilbrin, Kilmeen, Knockatooan,Knocktemple, Meens, Milford, Nad,Newmarket, Newtown, Roskeen, Rosnalee,Rowls, Tincoora, Tullylease, Williamstown,in the former Rural District of Kanturk ;
Aghinagh, An Sliabh Riabhach, Aglish, Be ´al
A´tha an Ghaorthaidh, Cannaway, Ceann
Droma, Cill na Martra, Claonra ´th,
Clondrohid, Clonmoyle, Doire Fhı ´nı´n, Gort
na Tiobratan, Greenville, Inchigeelagh,Kilberrihert, Macloneigh, Magourney,Mashanaglass, Na hUla ´in, Rahalisk,
Warrenscourt, in the former Rural District
of Macroom ;
Ardskeagh, Churchtown, Imphrick,
Liscarroll, Milltown, Rathluirc, Springfort,Streamhill, Templemary, in the former Rural
District of Mallow ;
Caherbarnagh, Coomlogane, Crinnaloo,
Cullen, Derragh, Doonasleen, Drishane,Keale, Kilcorney, Knocknagree, Rathcool,Skagh, in the former Rural District of
Millstreet ;
and the town of Macroom.
31Sch.Sch.
32[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Cork South- The city of Cork, except the part thereof Five
Central which is comprised in the constituency of
Cork North-Central;
and, in the county of Cork, the electoral
divisions of:
Ballygarvan, Bishopstown, Carrigaline,
Douglas, Iniskenny, Lehenagh, MonkstownRural, Monkstown Urban, in the formerRural District of Cork ;
Carrigaline, Kilpatrick, Liscleary,
Templebreedy, in the former Rural District
of Kinsale .
Cork South- The county of Cork, except the parts thereof Three
West which are comprised in the constituencies of
Cork East, Cork North-Central, Cork North-West and Cork South-Central.
Donegal In the county of Donegal the electoral ThreeNorth-East divisions of:
Ardmalin, Ballyliffin, Birdstown, Buncrana
Rural, Burt, Carndonagh, Carthage,Castlecary, Castleforward, Culdaff,Desertegny, Dunaff, Fahan, Glenagannon,Gleneely, Glentogher, Greencastle, Illies,Inch Island, Kilderry, Killea, Malin,Mintiaghs, Moville, Newtown Cunningham,Redcastle, Straid, Three Trees, Turmone,Whitecastle, in the former Rural District of
Inishowen ;
Ballymacool, Castlewray, Corravaddy,
Edenacarnan, Garta ´n, Gortnavern,
Killymasny, Kincraigy, Letterkenny Rural,Magheraboy, Manorcunningham, Mı ´na n
La´ba´in, Suı ´Corr, Templedouglas, in the
former Rural District of Letterkenny ;
An Cheathru ´Chaol, An Tearmann,
Ballyarr, Carraig Airt, Cnoc Colbha,Creamhghort, Fa ´naid Thiar, Fa ´naid
Thuaidh, Glen, Glenalla, Grianfort,Killygarvan, Kilmacrenan, Loch Caol,Millford, Rathmelton, Rathmullan, RosGoill, Rosnakill, in the former Rural District
of Millford ;
and the towns of Buncrana and Letterkenny.
Donegal The county of Donegal, except the part Three
South-West thereof which is comprised in the
constituency of Donegal North-East.
Dublin In the city of Dublin the electoral divisions FourCentral of:
Arran Quay A, Arran Quay B, Arran Quay
C, Arran Quay D, Arran Quay E, AshtownA, Ashtown B, Ballybough A, BallyboughB, Botanic A, Botanic B, Botanic C, CabraEast A, Cabra East B, Cabra East C, CabraWest A, Cabra West B, Cabra West C,Cabra West D, Drumcondra South B,Drumcondra South C, Inns Quay A, InnsQuay B, Inns Quay C, Mountjoy A,Mountjoy B, North City, North Dock A,North Dock B, North Dock C, Rotunda A,Rotunda B;[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
and that part of the electoral division of
Phoenix Park situated north of a line drawnalong Chapelizod Road, Conyngham Roadand Parkgate Street.
Dublin Mid- In the county of South Dublin the electoral FourWest divisions of:
Clondalkin-Cappaghmore, Clondalkin-
Dunawley, Clondalkin-Moorfield,Clondalkin-Rowlagh, Clondalkin Village,Lucan-Esker, Lucan Heights, Lucan-St.Helens, Newcastle, Palmerston Village,Palmerston West, Rathcoole, Saggart;
and that part of the electoral division of
Clondalkin-Monastery situated west of a linedrawn along the M50 Western Parkway.
Dublin North In the county of Fingal the electoral Four
divisions of:
Balbriggan Rural, Balbriggan Urban,
Ballyboghil, Balscadden, Clonmethan,Donabate, Garristown, Hollywood,Holmpatrick, Kinsaley, Lusk, Malahide East,Malahide West, Rush, Skerries, Swords-Glasmore, Swords-Lissenhall, Swords-Seatown, Swords Village.
Dublin North- In the city of Dublin the electoral divisions ThreeCentral of:
Beaumont B, Beaumont C, Beaumont D,
Beaumont E, Beaumont F, Clontarf East A,Clontarf East B, Clontarf East C, ClontarfEast D, Clontarf East E, Clontarf West A,Clontarf West B, Clontarf West C, ClontarfWest D, Clontarf West E, DrumcondraSouth A, Edenmore, Grace Park,Harmonstown A, Harmonstown B, KilmoreA, Kilmore B, Kilmore C, Kilmore D.
Dublin North- In the city of Dublin the electoral divisions ThreeEast of:
Ayrfield, Grange A, Grange B, Grange C,
Grange D, Grange E, Priorswood A,Priorswood B, Priorswood C, Priorswood D,Priorswood E, Raheny-Foxfield, Raheny-Greendale, Raheny-St. Assam;
and, in the county of Fingal, the electoral
divisions of:
Baldoyle, Balgriffin, Howth, Portmarnock
North, Portmarnock South, Sutton;
and that part of the electoral division of
Turnapin situated north of a line drawnalong the Northern Cross Route (M50),passing in a clockwise direction around andexcluding roundabout No. 3 at the junctionof the Northern Cross Route (M50) with theM1 motorway.
Dublin North- In the city of Dublin the electoral divisions ThreeWest of:
Ballygall A, Ballygall B, Ballygall C,
Ballygall D, Ballymun A, Ballymun B,Ballymun C, Ballymun D, Ballymun E,Ballymun F, Beaumont A, Finglas North A,
33Sch.Sch.
34[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Finglas North B, Finglas North C, Finglas
South A, Finglas South B, Finglas South C,
Finglas South D, Whitehall A, Whitehall B,Whitehall C, Whitehall D;
and, in the county of Fingal, those parts of
the electoral divisions of Airport,Blanchardstown-Abbotstown, Dubber, TheWard and Turnapin situated south of a linedrawn along the Northern Cross Route(M50), passing in a clockwise directionaround and including roundabout No. 3 atthe junction of the Northern Cross Route(M50) with the M1 Motorway.
Dublin South In the county of Du ´n Laoghaire-Rathdown Five
the electoral divisions of:
Ballinteer-Broadford, Ballinteer-Ludford,
Ballinteer-Marley, Ballinteer-Meadowbroads, Ballinteer-Meadowmount,Ballinteer-Woodpark, Cabinteely-Loughlinstown, Churchtown-Castle,Churchtown-Landscape, Churchtown-Nutgrove, Churchtown-Orwell, Churchtown-Woodlawn, Clonskeagh-Belfield,Clonskeagh-Farranboley, Clonskeagh-Milltown, Clonskeagh-Roebuck,Clonskeagh-Windy Arbour, Dundrum-Balally, Dundrum-Kilmacud, Dundrum-Sandyford, Dundrum-Sweetmount,Dundrum-Taney, Foxrock-Carrickmines,Foxrock-Torquay, Glencullen, Stillorgan-Deerpark, Stillorgan-Kilmacud, Stillorgan-Leopardstown, Stillorgan-Merville,Stillorgan-Mount Merrion, Tibradden;
and, in the county of South Dublin, the
electoral divisions of:
Ballyboden, Edmondstown, Firhouse-
Ballycullen, Firhouse-Knocklyon,Rathfarnham-Ballyroan, Rathfarnham-Butterfield, Rathfarnham-Hermitage,Rathfarnham-St. Enda’s, RathfarnhamVillage.
Dublin South- In the city of Dublin the electoral divisions FiveCentral of:
Carna, Chapelizod, Cherry-Orchard A,
Cherry-Orchard C, Crumlin A, Crumlin B,Crumlin C, Crumlin D, Crumlin E, CrumlinF, Decies, Drumfinn, Inchicore A, InchicoreB, Kilmainham A, Kilmainham B,Kilmainham C, Kimmage A, Kimmage B,Kimmage C, Kimmage D, Kimmage E,Kylemore, Merchants Quay A, MerchantsQuay B, Merchants Quay C, MerchantsQuay D, Merchants Quay E, MerchantsQuay F, Terenure A, Terenure B, TerenureC, Terenure D, Ushers A, Ushers B, UshersC, Ushers D, Ushers E, Ushers F,Walkinstown A, Walkinstown B,Walkinstown C;
and that part of the electoral division of
Phoenix Park situated south of a line drawnalong Chapelizod Road, Conyngham Roadand Parkgate Street;
and, in the county of South Dublin, the
electoral divisions of:
Templeogue-Kimmage Manor, Terenure-
Cherryfield, Terenure-Greentrees;[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
and those parts of the electoral divisions of
Clondalkin-Monastery, Clondalkin-Ballymount and Tallaght-Kilnamanaghsituated east of a line drawn along the M50Western Parkway.
Dublin South- In the city of Dublin the electoral divisions FourEast of:
Mansion House A, Mansion House B,
Pembroke East A, Pembroke East B,Pembroke East C, Pembroke East D,Pembroke East E, Pembroke West A,Pembroke West B, Pembroke West C,Rathfarnham, Rathmines East A, RathminesEast B, Rathmines East C, Rathmines EastD, Rathmines West A, Rathmines West B,Rathmines West C, Rathmines West D,Rathmines West E, Rathmines West F,Royal Exchange A, Royal Exchange B, St.Kevin’s, South Dock, Wood Quay A, WoodQuay B.
Dublin South- In the county of South Dublin the electoral FourWest divisions of:
Ballinascorney, Bohernabreena, Firhouse
Village, Tallaght-Avonbeg, Tallaght-Belgard,Tallaght-Fettercairn, Tallaght-Glenview,Tallaght-Jobstown, Tallaght-Killinardan,Tallaght-Kiltipper, Tallaght-Kingswood,Tallaght-Millbrook, Tallaght-Oldbawn,Tallaght-Springfield, Tallaght-Tymon,Templeogue-Cypress, Templeogue-Limekiln,Templeogue-Orwell, Templeogue-Osprey,Templeogue Village, Terenure-St. James;
and those parts of the electoral divisions of
Clondalkin-Ballymount and Tallaght-Kilnamanagh situated west of a line drawnalong the M50 Western Parkway.
Dublin West In the county of Fingal the electoral Four
divisions of:
Blanchardstown-Blakestown,
Blanchardstown-Coolmine, Blanchardstown-Corduff, Blanchardstown-Delwood,Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart,Blanchardstown-Roselawn, Blanchardstown-Tyrrelstown, Castleknock-Knockmaroon,Castleknock-Park, Kilsallaghan, LucanNorth, Swords-Forrest;
and those parts of the electoral divisions of
Airport, Blanchardstown-Abbotstown,Dubber and The Ward situated north of aline drawn along the Northern Cross Route(M50).
Du´n In the county of Du ´n Laoghaire-Rathdown Four
Laoghaire the electoral divisions of:
Ballybrack, Blackrock-Booterstown,
Blackrock-Carysfort, Blackrock-Central,Blackrock-Glenomena, Blackrock-Monkstown, Blackrock-Newpark, Blackrock-Seapoint, Blackrock-Stradbrook, Blackrock-Templehill, Blackrock-Williamstown,Cabinteely-Granitefield, Cabinteely-Kilbogget, Cabinteely-Pottery, Dalkey-Avondale, Dalkey-Bullock, Dalkey-Coliemore, Dalkey Hill, Dalkey Upper, Du ´n
Laoghaire-East Central, Du ´n Laoghaire-
Glasthule, Du ´n Laoghaire-Glenageary, Du ´n
35Sch.Sch.
36[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Laoghaire-Monkstown Farm, Du ´n
Laoghaire-Mount Town, Du ´n Laoghaire-
Sallynoggin East, Du ´n Laoghaire-
Sallynoggin South, Du ´n Laoghaire-
Sallynoggin West, Du ´n Laoghaire-Salthill,
Du´n Laoghaire-Sandycove, Du ´n Laoghaire-
West Central, Foxrock-Beechpark, Foxrock-Deansgrange, Killiney North, Killiney South,Shankill-Rathmichael, Shankill-Rathsallagh,Shankill-Shanganagh, Stillorgan-Priory.
Galway East In the county of Galway the electoral Four
divisions of:
Abbeygormacan, Ahascragh, Aughrim,
Ballinasloe Rural, Ballymacward, Clonfert,Clontuskert, Kellysgrove, Kilconnell,Killaan, Killallaghtan, Killoran, Killure,Kilmacshane, Kiltormer, Kylemore,Laurencetown, Lismanny, Oatfield, in theformer Rural District of Ballinasloe No. 1 ;
Ballinastack, Ballymoe, Ballynakill,
Boyounagh, Creggs, Curraghmore,Glennamaddy, Island, Kilcroan, Kiltullagh,Raheen, Scregg, Shankill, Templetogher,Toberroe, in the former Rural District of
Glennamaddy ;
Ardamullivan, Ardrahan, Ballycahalan,
Beagh, Cahermore, Cappard, Castletaylor,Doorus, Drumacoo, Gort, Kilbeacanty,Killeely, Killeenavarra, Killinny, Kiltartan,Kilthomas, Kinvarra, Rahasane, Skehanagh,in the former Rural District of Gort ;
Aille, Athenry, Ballynagar, Bracklagh,
Bullaun, Cappalusk, Castleboy, Cloonkeen,Colmanstown, Craughwell, Derrylaur,Drumkeary, Graigabbey, Grange, Greethill,Kilchreest, Kilconickny, Kilconierin,Killimor, Killogilleen, Kilmeen, Kilreekill,Kilteskill, Kiltullagh, Lackalea, Leitrim,Loughatorick, Loughrea Rural, LoughreaUrban, Marblehill, Mountain, Movode,Raford, Tiaquin, Woodford, in the formerRural District of Loughrea ;
Annagh, Ballynakill, Caltra, Castleblakeney,
Castleffrench, Clonbrock, Cloonkeen,Cooloo, Derryglassaun, Killeroran, Killian,Mount Bellew, Mounthazel, Taghboy, in theformer Rural District of Mount Bellew ;
Abbeyville, Ballyglass, Coos, Derrew,
Drummin, Eyrecourt, Killimor, Kilmalinoge,Kilquain, Meelick, Moat, Pallas, Portumna,Tiranascragh, Tynagh, in the former Rural
District of Portumna ;
Abbey East, Abbey West, Addergoole,
Annaghdown, Ballinderry, Ballinduff,Ballynapark, Beaghmore, Belclare,Carrownagur, Carrowrevagh, Claretuam,Clonbern, Cloonkeen, Cummer,Donaghpatrick, Doonbally, Dunmore North,Dunmore South, Foxhall, Headford,Hillsbrook, Kilbennan, Kilcoona, Killeany,Killeen, Killererin, Killower, Killursa,Kilmoylan, Kilshanvy, Levally, Milltown,Monivea, Moyne, Ryehill, Toberadosh,[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Tuam Rural, Tuam Urban, in the former
Rural District of Tuam;
and the town of Ballinasloe.
Galway West The county of Galway, except the part Five
thereof which is comprised in theconstituency of Galway East;
and the city of Galway.
Kerry North- In the county of Kerry the electoral Three
West divisions of:Limerick
Ardagh, Astee, Ballincloher, Ballyconry,
Ballyduff, Ballyegan, Ballyhorgan, Beal,Carrig, Causeway, Cloontubbrid,Drommartin, Duagh, Ennismore, Gullane,Gunsborough, Kilfeighny, Killehenny,Killury, Kilmeany, Kilshenane, Kiltomy,Leitrim, Lislaughtin, Lisselton, ListowelRural, Lixnaw, Moynsha, Newtownsandes,Rathea, Shronowen, Tarbert, Tarmon,Trienearagh, Urlee, in the former Rural
District of Listowel ;
Abbeydorney, Arabela, Ardfert, Ballyegan,
Ballyheige, Ballynahaglish, Ballynorig,Ballyseedy, Banna, Blennerville, Brosna,Clogherbrien, Crinny, Doon, Gneeves,Kerryhead, Kilflyn, Killahan, Kilmurry,Knocknagashel, Lackabaun, Mount Eagle,Nohaval, O’Brennan, Ratass, Tralee Rural,Tubrid, in the former Rural District of
Tralee ;
and the towns of Listowel and Tralee;and, in the county of Limerick, the electoral
divisions of:
Fleanmore, Glin, Kilfergus, Kilmoylan, in
the former Rural District of Glin ;
Abbeyfeale, Ardagh, Caher, Dromtrasna,
Garryduff, Glenagower, Glengort,Glensharrold, Monagay, Mountcollins, Port,Rathronan, Rooskagh, Templeglentan, inthe former Rural District of Newcastle.
Kerry South The county of Kerry, except the part thereof Three
which is comprised in the constituency ofKerry North-West Limerick.
Kildare North In the county of Kildare the electoral Four
divisions of:
Balraheen, Celbridge, Cloncurry, Donadea,
Donaghcumper, Kilcock, Leixlip, Maynooth,Straffan, in the former Rural District of
Celbridge No. 1 ;
Ballynadrumny, Cadamstown, Carbury,
Carrick, Drehid, Dunfierth, Kilpatrick,Kilrainy, Windmill Cross, in the formerRural District of Edenderry No. 2 ;
Bodenstown, Clane, Downings, Kill, Kilteel,
Naas Rural, Newtown, Oughterard,Rathmore, Robertstown, Timahoe North,Timahoe South, in the former Rural District
of Naas No. 1 ;
and the town of Naas.
37Sch.Sch.
38[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Kildare South The county of Kildare, except the part Three
thereof which is comprised in theconstituency of Kildare North.
Laois-Offaly The county of Laois and the county of Five
Offaly, except the part thereof which iscomprised in the constituency of TipperaryNorth.
Limerick The county of Limerick, except the parts Three
thereof which are comprised in theconstituencies of Limerick City and KerryNorth-West Limerick.
Limerick City In the county of Limerick the electoral Four
divisions of:
Ballycummin, Ballysimon, Ballyvarra,
Castleconnell, Limerick South Rural, in theformer Rural District of Limerick No. 1 ;
and the city of Limerick;and, in the former Rural District of Meelick,
in the county of Clare, the electoral divisionof Ballyglass.
Longford- The county of Longford; FourWestmeath
and, in the county of Westmeath, the
electoral divisions of:
Athlone East Rural, Auburn, Ballybroder,
Bellanalack, Carn, Castledaly, Glassan,Kilcumreragh, Killinure, Moate, MountTemple, Moydrum, Muckanagh, Tubbrit,Umma, in the former Rural District of
Athlone No. 1 ;
Ardnagragh, Ballymore, Doonis,
Drumraney, Noughaval, Piercetown,Templepatrick, Winetown, in the formerRural District of Ballymore ;
Boherquill, Coole, Coolure, Finnea, Glore,
Knockarrow, Rathowen, Street, in theformer Rural District of Coole ;
Ardnaglew, Ballinalack, Ballykilmore,
Ballymorin, Ballynagore, Belvidere, Carrick,Castle, Castlelost, Castletown, Churchtown,Cloghan, Clonfad, Clonlost, Derrymore,Dysart, Emper, Enniscoffey, Gaybrook,Glenlough, Greenpark, Griffinstown,Heathstown, Hopestown, Huntingdon,Jamestown, Kilbeggan, Kilbixy, Killare,Killucan, Kinnegad, Knockdrim, Lackan,Lauree, Middleton, Milltown, MullingarRural, Mullingar North Urban, MullingarSouth Urban, Multyfarnham, Newtown,Owel, Portloman, Raharney, Rahugh,Rathconrath, Russellstown, Skeagh, Sonna,Stonehall, Streamstown, Taghmon,Tullaghan, Woodland, in the former Rural
District of Mullingar ;
and the town of Athlone.
Louth The county of Louth; Five
and, in the county of Meath, the electoral
divisions of:
Julianstown, St. Mary’s (part), in the former
Rural District of Meath.
Mayo The county of Mayo. Five[2009.] [ No.4.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Meath East In the county of Meath the electoral Three
divisions of:
Drumcondra, Grangegeeth, Killary, in the
former Rural District of Ardee No. 2 ;
Culmullin, Donaghmore, Dunboyne,
Dunshaughlin, Kilbrew, Killeen, Kilmore,Rathfeigh, Ratoath, Rodanstown, Skreen, inthe former Rural District of Dunshaughlin ;
Ardagh, Carrickleck, Ceanannas Mo ´r Rural,
Cruicetown, Kilmainham, Maperath,Moybolgue, Moynalty, Newcastle, Newtown,Nobber, Posseckstown, Staholmog,Trohanny, in the former Rural District of
Kells ;
Ardcath, Duleek, Mellifont, Stamullin, in the
former Rural District of Meath ;
Ardmulchan, Castletown, Domhnach
Pha´draig, Kentstown, Painestown,
Rathkenny, Slane, Stackallan, Tara, in theformer Rural District of Navan ;
and the town of Kells.
Meath West The county of Meath, except the parts Three
thereof which are comprised in theconstituencies of Meath East and Louth, andthe county of Westmeath, except the partthereof which is comprised in theconstituency of Longford-Westmeath.
Roscommon- The county of Roscommon; ThreeSouth Leitrim
and, in the county of Leitrim, the electoral
divisions of:
Ballinamore, Cloverhill, Corralla, Drumreilly
North, Drumreilly South, Garradice,Greaghglass, Killygar, Newtowngore,Oughteragh, in the former Rural District of
Ballinamore ;
Annaduff, Carrick-on-Shannon, Drumsna,
Gortnagullion, Gowel, in the former Rural
District of Carrick-on-Shannon No. 1 ;
Aghavas, Beihy, Breandrum, Bunny Beg,
Carrigallen East, Carrigallen West, Cashel,Castlefore, Cattan, Cloone, Corriga,Drumard, Drumdoo, Drumod, Fenagh,Gortermone, Keeldra, Lisgillock, Mohill,Rinn, Riverstown, Roosky, Rowan, in theformer Rural District of Mohill.
Sligo-North The county of Sligo and the county of Three
Leitrim Leitrim, except the part thereof which is
comprised in the constituency ofRoscommon-South Leitrim.
Tipperary The county of North Tipperary; ThreeNorth
and, in the county of South Tipperary, the
electoral divisions of:
Ballysheehan, Clogher, Clonoulty East,
Clonoulty West, Gaile, Graystown,Killenaule, Nodstown, in the former Rural
District of Cashel ;
Ballyphilip, Buolick, Crohane, Farranrory,
Fennor, Kilcooly, New Birmingham,Poyntstown, in the former Rural District of
Slievardagh ;
39Sch.Sch.
40[No.4.] [2009.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
Number ofName AreaMembers
Cappagh, Curraheen, Donohill, Glengar, in
the former Rural District of Tipperary No. 1 ;
and, in the county of Offaly, the electoral
divisions of:
Aghacon, Barna, Cangort, Cullenwaine,
Dunkerrin, Ettagh, Gorteen, Mountheaton,Shinrone, Templeharry, in the former Rural
District of Roscrea No. 2 .
Tipperary The county of South Tipperary, except the Three
South part thereof which is comprised in the
constituency of Tipperary North;
and, in the former Rural District of Clonmel
No. 2 in the county of Waterford, the
electoral divisions of:
Kilmacomma, Kilronan;and the townlands of:Barravakeen, Bawnard, Boola,
Carrickabrone, Coolishal, Derrinlaur Lower,Derrinlaur Upper, Glendaw, GurteenLower, Gurteen Upper, Lisheen, TikincorLower, Tikincor Upper, in the electoraldivision of Gurteen;
and the townlands of:Croan Lower, Croan Upper, Glenary,
Glennagad, Kilgainy Lower, Kilgainy Upper,Knocklucas, Knocknagriffin, Lyranearla,Monacalee, Poulboy, Poulnagunoge,Scrothea East, Scrothea West, Spa, in theelectoral division of St. Mary’s.
Waterford The county of Waterford, except the part Four
thereof which is comprised in theconstituency of Tipperary South;
and the city of Waterford.
Wexford The county of Wexford. Five
Wicklow The county of Wicklow; Five
and, in the county of Carlow, the electoral
divisions of:
Clonmore, Hacketstown, Haroldstown,
Kineagh, Rahill, Rathvilly, Ticknock,Williamstown, in the former Rural District
of Baltinglass No. 2.