————————
Number 36of2009
————————
COURTS AND COURT OFFICERS ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definition.3. Regulations.4. Expenses.
PART 2
Temporary Custody
5. Definitions ( Part 2 ).
6. Persons held for section 7 purposes.
7. Purposes of temporary custody.
8. Beginning and end of temporary custody.9. Consequences of placement in temporary custody.
10. Handing over of medications, etc., when person in tempor-
ary custody.
11. Functions of holding area officer.12. Regulations relating to temporary custody.
PART 3
Combined Court Office
13. Definitions ( Part 3 ).
14. Establishment of combined court offices.
12[No. 36.] [2009.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
15. Variation of functions or dissolution of combined court
office.
16. Consultations.17. Special Criminal Court.18. Combined court office: deemed powers and functions.19. Combined court office manager.20. Management and control of combined court office.21. Staff of combined court office.22. Functions of staff.23. Continuity of administration of justice not to be affected.24. Amendment of Courts Service Act 1998.
PART 4
Miscellaneous Provisions
25. Amendment of section 22 of Criminal Procedure Act 1967.26. Amendment of section 24 of Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act
1851.
————————
Acts Referred to
Court Officers Act 1926 1926, No. 26
Courts Service Act 1998 1998, No. 8Criminal Justice (Public Order) Act 1994 1994, No. 2Criminal Justice Act 2007 2007, No. 29Criminal Procedure Act 1967 1967, No. 12Offences Against the State Act 1939 1939, No. 13Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 14 & 15 Vic., c.93Prisons Act 2007 2007, No. 10————————
Number 36of2009
————————
COURTS AND COURT OFFICERS ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE PLACEMENT IN TEMPOR-
ARY CUSTODY OF CERTAIN DETAINED PERSONS INORDER TO FACILITATE THEIR APPEARANCEBEFORE A COURT; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTAB-LISHMENT OF COMBINED COURT OFFICES; TOAMEND THE COURTS SERVICE ACT 1998, THE CRIMI-NAL PROCEDURE ACT 1967 AND THE PETTYSESSIONS (IRELAND) ACT 1851, AND TO PROVIDE FORRELATED MATTERS.
[24th November , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Courts and Court Officers
Act 2009.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provisions and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or different provisions.
2.—In this Act “Minister ”means the Minister for Justice, Equality
and Law Reform.
3.—(1) The Minister may make regulations prescribing any
matter or thing which is referred to in this Act as prescribed or tobe prescribed.
(2) Regulations under this Act may contain such incidental, sup-
plementary and consequential provisions as appear to the Ministerto be necessary or expedient for the purpose of the regulations.
(3) Every regulation under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it has been made
3Short title and
commencement.
Definition.
Regulations.Pt.1 S.3
Expenses.
Definitions ( Part 2 ).
Persons held for
section 7 purposes.
4[No. 36.] [2009.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
and, if a resolution annulling the regulation is passed by either such
House within the next 21 days on which that House has sat after theregulation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulled accord-ingly, but without prejudice to the validity of anything previouslydone thereunder.
4.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.
PART 2
Temporary Custody
5.—In this Part —
“Act of 2007 ”means the Prisons Act 2007;
“governor ”has the same meaning as it has in the Act of 2007;
“holding area officer ”means —
(a) a governor, or a member of the Garda S íochána, in whose
temporary custody a person is placed under section 6 ,
(b) a person who assumes the duties of a holding area officer
under section 11(6) ,
(c) a member in charge who assumes the powers and functions
of a holding area officer under paragraph (a) ofsection
11(7) ,o r
(d) a member of the Garda S íochána to whom the powers and
functions referred to in paragraph (c) are transferred
under paragraph (b) ofsection 11(7) ;
“member in charge ”means a member of the Garda S íochána who is
in charge of a Garda S íochána station referred to in section 11(7) ;
“Prison Rules ”means the Prison Rules 2007 (S.I. No. 252 of 2007);
“prisoner ”has the same meaning as it has in the Act of 2007;
“prison officer ”has the same meaning as it has in section 19(6) (as
inserted by section 41(4) of the Act of 2007) of the Criminal Justice(Public Order) Act 1994;
“temporary custody ”shall be construed in accordance with subsec-
tions (1) and (2)ofsection 6 .
6.—(1) A prisoner may be placed in the temporary custody of a
member of the Garda S íochána where the placement is for a purpose
referred to in section 7 .
(2) A person who is lawfully in the custody of the Garda S íochána
may be placed in the temporary custody of a governor where theplacement is for a purpose referred to in section 7 .
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsections (1) and (2),
a person who is placed in temporary custody under either of those[2009.] [ No. 36.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
subsections may be placed in a place in or adjacent to a court build-
ing in which the appearance or hearing referred to in section 7 con-
cerned is to be held.
(4) A prisoner or a person who is lawfully in the custody of the
Garda S íochána who is not placed in temporary custody under sub-
section (1) or(2)may be placed in a place referred to in subsection
(3)for a purpose referred to in section 7 .
7.—A prisoner or other person may be placed in temporary cus-
tody under section 6 for the purposes of facilitating —
(a) a court appearance by that person, or
(b) his or her participation, as a witness or in another capacity,
in a court hearing involving him or her.
8.—(1) Without prejudice to any other enactment, the temporary
custody of a prisoner under section 6(1) —
(a) shall commence from the moment the prisoner is placed
in the custody of the holding area officer, and
(b) shall cease from —
(i) such time as the prisoner is returned to the governor
in whose custody he or she was before the temporarycustody commenced, or
(ii) such time as the prisoner is released by order of the
court,
as the case may be.
(2) Without prejudice to any other enactment, the temporary cus-
tody of a person under section 6(2) —
(a) shall commence from the moment the person is placed in
the custody of the holding area officer, and
(b) shall cease from —
(i) such time as the person is returned to the person in
whose custody he or she was before the temporarycustody commenced or another member of theGarda S íochána, or
(ii) such time as the person is released by order of the
court,
as the case may be.
9.—(1) A prisoner who is placed in temporary custody under
section 6(1) shall be deemed, for the duration of the placement, to
remain in the custody of the governor in whose custody he or shewas before being so placed.
(2) A person who is placed in temporary custody under section
6(2) shall be deemed, for the duration of the placement, to remain
in the custody of the Garda S íochána.
5Pt.2 S.6
Purposes of
temporary custody.
Beginning and end
of temporarycustody.
Consequences of
placement intemporary custody.Pt.2
Handing over of
medications, etc.,when person intemporary custody.
Functions of
holding area officer.
6[No. 36.] [2009.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
10.—(1) On placing a person in temporary custody under section
6, the governor or member of the Garda S íochána in whose custody
that person was shall hand to the holding area officer concerned —
(a) any medication or prescription for medication that he or
she possesses in respect of the person,
(b) any information relating to the person ’s health that he or
she is aware of, and
(c) any additional articles, documents or information that the
Minister may prescribe.
(2) When a holding area officer returns a person placed in tem-
porary custody under section 6 to a person mentioned in subsection
(1)(b)(i) orsubsection (2)(b)(i) ofsection 8 , the holding area officer
shall hand to that person —
(a) any medication or prescription for medication that he or
she possesses in respect of the person who was intemporary custody,
(b) any information relating to the person ’s health that he or
she is aware of, and
(c) any additional articles, documents or information that the
Minister may prescribe.
11.—(1) Notwithstanding section 9 , a holding area officer shall, as
regards a person who has been placed in his or her temporarycustody under section 6 —
(a) prevent his or her escape from lawful custody,
(b) prevent the commission of an offence by him or her,
(c) ensure that he or she behaves in an orderly and
disciplined fashion,
(d) bring him or her to a court or court office, as required,
(e) ensure his or her appearance before a court, and
(f) comply with any order of a court relating to his or her
custody, treatment or transfer.
(2) A holding area officer may search, in accordance with the
Prison Rules, the person of any person who has been placed in hisor her temporary custody under section 6 if he or she is of the opinion
that it is necessary to do so to perform his or her functions underthis Part.
(3) A holding area officer may, where necessary, use all reason-
able force in the performance of his or her functions under this Part.
(4) Where section 6(4) applies to a person who is lawfully in the
custody of the Garda S íochána, a member of the Garda S íochána in
whose custody that person is shall, without prejudice to any otherenactment, have the powers and functions of a holding area officerunder subsections (1) to(3).[2009.] [ No. 36.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the
powers under the Prison Rules of a holding area officer who is aprison officer.
(6) Where section 6(1) applies, a member of the Garda S íochána
who is of a higher rank than the holding area officer may authorisethe transfer of the powers and functions of that holding area officerunder this Part to another member of the Garda S íochána, and that
other member shall assume those powers and functions.
(7) Where section 6(1) applies, and the prisoner placed in
temporary custody is or has been placed in a Garda S íochána station,
then notwithstanding that any other member of the Garda S íochána
is also a holding area officer under this Part, the member in chargeof that Garda S íochána station —
(a) shall assume the powers and functions of a holding area
officer under this Part, and
(b) where he or she considers it necessary for the performance
of any of his or her functions, and for such period orperiods as he or she considers necessary, may authorisethe transfer of any or all of the powers and functionsassumed under paragraph (a) to another member of the
Garda S íochána.
(8) Where subsection (7)(b) applies, the transfer of the powers
and functions concerned to a member of the Garda S íochána shall
be construed as reserving to the member in charge the right to exer-cise those powers and to perform those functions concurrently withthat member.
12.—The Minister may prescribe —
(a) the standards to be employed in the safekeeping of a per-
son who has been placed in temporary custody undersection 6 ,
(b) standards and procedures relating to the orderly manage-
ment of any place in which such a person is to be held,
(c) the records on the temporary custody of such a person to
be kept, and
(d) the —
(i) articles, documents or information which are to be
handed over, and
(ii) procedures, including record keeping, that are to be
followed,
where subsection (1) or(2)ofsection 10 applies.
PART 3
Combined Court Office
13.—In this Part —
7Pt.2 S.11
Regulations relating
to temporarycustody.
Definitions ( Part 3 ).Pt.3 S.13
Establishment of
combined courtoffices.
8[No. 36.] [2009.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
“Act of 1939 ”means the Offences Against the State Act 1939;
“constituent court office ”means —
(a) a court office, the business or some of the business of
which shall be transacted in a combined court officeunder section 14 or15,o r
(b) a registrar or other person deemed to be a constituent
court office under section 17(2) ,
and “constituent court ”shall be construed accordingly;
“combined court office ”means an office established under section
14;
“combined court office manager ”, in relation to a combined court
office, means a person appointed under section 19 to be the manager
of that office;
“court office ”means any office of, or attached to, any of the
following:
(a) the Supreme Court;
(b) the High Court;
(c) the President of the High Court;
(d) the Circuit Court;
(e) the District Court;
and, for the purposes of this definition, a district probate registry
shall be deemed to be an office attached to the High Court;
“enactment ”means an Act or a statutory instrument or any portion
of an Act or statutory instrument;
“Special Criminal Court ”means a court established under Part V of
the Act of 1939.
14.—(1) Notwithstanding any other enactment, the Courts Service
may establish a combined court office in accordance with this sectionand section 16 .
(2) In establishing a combined court office under subsection (1) ,
the Courts Service shall —
(a) designate two or more court offices to be constituent court
offices of that combined court office, and
(b) specify the business of the constituent court offices that
shall be transacted in the combined court office.
(3) The Courts Service shall, as soon as may be after a combined
court office is established, publish notice of that fact and of thematters referred to in subsection (2) relating to that office in Iris
Oifigiúil , but failure to so publish shall not affect the validity of the
establishment of the combined court office concerned.[2009.] [ No. 36.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
15.—(1) The Courts Service may vary the functions of a combined
court office, including by —
(a) varying the business of the constituent court offices which
is to be transacted there, other than any business that isthe subject of an order under section 17(1) ,
(b) designating another court office to be a constituent court
office of that combined court office, and
(c) removing from the business of the combined court office
any business of a constituent court office, other than anybusiness that is the subject of an order under section
17(1) .
(2) The power to establish a combined court office conferred by
section 14(1) includes the power to dissolve such an office, except
where to dissolve the office would affect an order made undersection 17(1) .
(3) Sections 14(3) and 16apply, with any necessary modifications,
when the Courts Service exercises its powers under subsection (1)
or(2).
16.—Before establishing a combined court office under section 14 ,
the Courts Service shall consult with —
(a) the Chief Justice, where a proposed constituent court
office is an office attached to the Supreme Court,
(b) the President of the High Court, where a proposed con-
stituent court office is an office attached to the HighCourt or the President of the High Court,
(c) the President of the Circuit Court, where a proposed con-
stituent court office is an office of, or attached to, theCircuit Court,
(d) the President of the District Court, where a proposed con-
stituent court office is an office of, or attached to, theDistrict Court.
17.—(1) Notwithstanding any other enactment, the Government
may, by order, provide that specified business of a Special CriminalCourt, other than business that is required to be transacted by orbefore a judge or judges of such a Court, shall be transacted in acombined court office.
(2) A registrar appointed for the purposes of a Special Criminal
Court under section 39 of the Act of 1939, or any person acting underthe direction of such a registrar, in the transaction of the businessthat is the subject of an order under subsection (1) , is deemed to be
a constituent court office for the purposes of this Part.
18.—Where, under section 14 ,15or17, the business of a constitu-
ent court office shall be transacted in a combined court office, forthe purpose of the transaction the following shall apply:
(a) the combined court office is deemed to be an office of or
attached to the constituent court concerned;
9Pt.3
Variation of
functions ordissolution ofcombined courtoffice.
Consultations.
Special Criminal
Court.
Combined court
office: deemedpowers andfunctions.Pt.3 S.18
Combined court
office manager.
Management and
control of combinedcourt office.
Staff of combined
court office.
Functions of staff.
10[No. 36.] [2009.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
(b) the combined court office manager of that combined court
office and the members of staff of the Courts Serviceemployed in that office under section 21 are deemed to
be officers attached to, or attached to an office of, thatconstituent court;
(c) any reference in an enactment to an office of or attached
to that constituent court or to an officer or member ofstaff of that court is, save where the context otherwiserequires, deemed to include that combined court officeor an officer or member of staff of that combined courtoffice, as the case may be.
19.—Notwithstanding any provision of any other enactment,
where a combined court office is established under section 14 , the
Courts Service shall appoint —
(a) a member of its staff, or
(b) a county registrar,
to be the manager of that combined court office.
20.—(1) Notwithstanding any provision of any other enactment,
including any enactment conferring such powers on an officer of aconstituent court, a combined court office manager shall, subject tosubsection (2) , have the management and control of the combined
court office.
(2) In performing the function referred to in subsection (1) , the
combined court office manager shall in regard to all matters ofgeneral administration, be subject to the general directions of theCourts Service.
21.—There shall be employed in a combined court office such and
so many members of the staff of the Courts Service as the CourtsService shall from time to time determine.
22.—(1) The Courts Service may, notwithstanding any other pro-
vision of any enactment, appoint any member of staff of the CourtsService employed in a combined court office under section 21 as one
or more of the following:
(a) a District Court clerk;
(b) a principal officer, within the meaning of Part I of the
Court Officers Act 1926, of any office attached to theHigh Court or the President of the High Court.
(2) A combined court office manager may, notwithstanding any
other provision of any enactment, direct any member of staff of theCourts Service employed in a combined court office under section 21
to act as registrar to any of the following constituent courts:
(a) the Central Criminal Court;
(b) the Court of Criminal Appeal;
(c) the Courts-Martial Appeal Court;[2009.] [ No. 36.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
(d) the Circuit Court.
(3) Where, under subsection (2) , a person is directed to act as
registrar to a court mentioned in paragraphs (a) to(d)of that subsec-
tion, any reference in an enactment to a registrar of the court con-cerned is deemed to include such a person.
23.—(1) The continuity of the administration of justice shall not
be interrupted by the —
(a) establishment of a combined court office under section 14 ,
(b) variation of the functions, or the dissolution, of a com-
bined courts office under section 15 ,o r
(c) making of an order under section 17 .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) —
(a) on the establishment of a combined court office under
section 14 , the variation of the functions of a combined
court office under section 15 , or the making of an order
under section 17(1) , the business of a constituent court
office shall be continued in the combined court office,
(b) where business has begun to be transacted in a combined
court office which, by virtue of the variation of the func-tions, or dissolution, of that office under section 15 ,i s
subsequently required to be transacted in another courtoffice, that business shall be continued in that other courtoffice, and
(c) where the Government make an order under section 17(1) ,
the business concerned that was transacted in a combinedcourt office shall be continued by or before the registrar,or any person acting under the direction of such a regis-trar, of the Special Criminal Court concerned.
24.—Section 6(2) of the Courts Service Act 1998 is amended —
(a) in paragraph ( i), by deleting “and”,
(b) in paragraph ( j), by substituting “designate court venues,
and”for“designate court venues. ”, and
(c) by inserting the following after paragraph ( j):
“(k) establish, vary the functions of, or dissolve, a
combined court office under sections 14 and 15
of the Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .”.
PART 4
Miscellaneous Provisions
25.—Section 22 of the Criminal Procedure Act 1967 is amended
by inserting the following subsection after subsection (1A) (insertedby section 18( a) of the Criminal Justice Act 2007):
11Pt.3 S.22
Continuity of
administration ofjustice not to beaffected.
Amendment of
Courts Service Act1998.
Amendment of
section 22 ofCriminal ProcedureAct 1967.Pt.4 S.25
Amendment of
section 24 of PettySessions (Ireland)Act 1851.
12[No. 36.] [2009.] Courts and Court Officers Act 2009 .
“(1B) A recognisance to which subsection (1) applies may be
taken by —
(a) any judge of the District Court, or
(b) any District Court clerk. ”.
26.—Section 24 of the Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 is
amended by the insertion of the following paragraph after para-graph 2:
“2A. ( a) A recognisance to which paragraph 2 applies may be
taken by —
(i) any judge of the District Court,
(ii) any District Court clerk,
(iii) a peace commissioner designated for that pur-
pose by order of the Minister for Justice,Equality and Law Reform,
(iv) the governor of a prison, or
(v) a prison officer designated for that purpose by
the governor of a prison.
(b) in this paragraph ‘prison ’has the same meaning as it
has in the Prisons Act 2007. ”.