————————
Number 14of2009
————————
FINANCIAL MEASURES (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)
ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title.
PART 2
Direct Debit Instructions and Mandates
2. Continuation of certain direct debit instructions.
PART 3
Transfer of Assets of Certain Pension Funds to National
Pensions Reserve Fund
3. Interpretation ( Part 3 ).
4. References to “relevant pension scheme”.5. Transfer orders.
6. Effect of transfer order on assets of funds.7. Relevant pension scheme to continue after making of
transfer order.
8. Transfer of assets under transfer order.9. Application of certain other Acts.
10. Value of assets transferred to be offset against contributions
to Reserve Fund.
11. Exercise of discretions under relevant pension scheme after
making of transfer order.
12. Continuation of scheme regarding obligations and benefits.
12[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
13. Changes in rules of covered pension schemes.
14. Complaints and disputes.
PART 4
Guarantees by Minister for Finance
15. Construction of certain provisions when Minister for Finance
guarantees non-equity securities, etc.
PART 5
Amendments of other Acts
16. Amendment of the Central Bank Act 1989.
17. Amendment of the Credit Institutions (Financial Support)
Act 2008.
18. Amendment of the Insurance (No. 2) Act 1983.19. Amendment of Insurance Act 1989.20. Amendment of Netting of Financial Contracts Act 1995.21. Amendment of Taxes Consolidation Act 1997.
SCHEDULE 1
Covered Pension Funds
PART 1
University Pension Funds
PART 2
Other Pension funds
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments of Other Acts
PART 1
Amendment of the Central Bank Act 1989
PART 2
Amendment of the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act
2008
PART 3
Amendment of the Insurance (No. 2) Act 1983
PART 4
Amendment of the Insurance Act 1989[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
PART 5
Amendment of the Netting of Financial Contracts Act 1995
PART 6
Amendment of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997
————————
34[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
Central Bank Act 1989 1989, No. 16
Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008 2008, No. 18Finance Act 1970 1970, No. 14Insurance (No. 2) Act 1983 1983, No. 29Insurance Act 1989 1989, No. 3Insurance Acts 1909 to 2000Investment Funds, Companies and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions Act 2005 2005, No. 12
Investment Limited Partnerships Act 1994 1994, No. 24Investment of the National Pensions Reserve Fund and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2009 2009, No. 7
Limited Partnerships Act 1907 7 Edw. 7, c.24National Pensions Reserve Fund Act 2000 2000, No. 33Netting of Financial Contracts Act 1995 1995, No. 25Pensions Act 1990 1990, No. 25Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Universities Act 1997 1997, No. 24————————
Number 14of2009
————————
FINANCIAL MEASURES (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)
ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONTINUATION OF CER-
TAIN DIRECT DEBIT MANDATES AFTER THE COM-ING INTO OPERATION OF THE SINGLE EUROPEANPAYMENTS AREA DIRECT DEBIT SCHEME, TOPROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER OF THE ASSETS OFCERTAIN PENSION FUNDS TO THE NATIONAL PEN-SIONS RESERVE FUND, AND THE CONTINUED PAY-MENT OF BENEFITS FORMERLY PAYABLE FROMTHOSE FUNDS, TO MAKE PROVISION IN RELATIONTO THE GIVING OF CERTAIN GUARANTEES BY THEMINISTER FOR FINANCE, TO AMEND THE CENTRALBANK ACT 1989 SO AS TO CLARIFY ITS APPLICATIONTO CERTAIN ACQUIRING TRANSACTIONS, TOAMEND THE CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FINANCIALSUPPORT) ACT 2008 SO AS TO ALLOW THE EXTEN-SION OF THE PERIOD IN WHICH FINANCIAL SUPPORTUNDER THAT ACT CAN BE PROVIDED, TO AMENDTHE INSURANCE (NO. 2) ACT 1983 AND THEINSURANCE ACT 1989 IN RELATION TO LIFEINSURANCE AND REINSURANCE, TO AMEND THENETTING OF FINANCIAL CONTRACTS ACT 1995 SO ASTO CLARIFY WHETHER CERTAIN PERSONS ARE PAR-TIES TO A NETTING AGREEMENT, TO AMEND THETAXES CONSOLIDATION ACT 1997 IN RELATION TOTHE TAXATION POSITION OF THE NATIONAL PEN-SIONS RESERVE FUND COMMISSION IN RELATION TOCERTAIN ASSETS TRANSFERRED FROM PENSIONFUNDS TO THE NATIONAL PENSIONS RESERVEFUND, AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED PURPOSES;
[26th June , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—This Act may be cited as the Financial Measures
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009.
5
Short title.Continuation of
certain direct debitinstructions.
6[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
PART 2
Direct Debit Instructions and Mandates
2.—(1) The Minister for Finance may make regulations providing
for direct debit instructions to continue to operate as direct debitmandates after the SEPA Scheme comes into operation.
(2) Subject to any regulations made by virtue of subsection (1) ,a
direct debit instruction continues to operate, after the SEPA Schemecomes into operation, as a direct debit mandate according to itsterms.
(3) Regulations made by virtue of subsection (1) —
(a) may, for the purpose of continuing the operation of a
direct debit instruction as a direct debit mandate, modifythe operation, in relation to such an instruction or man-date, of any enactment or rule of law, and
(b) may make provision—
(i) requiring originators that intend to continue direct
debit instructions in operation as direct debit man-dates after the SEPA Scheme comes into operationto make available specified information about theScheme, and about how the information is requiredto be made available, and
(ii) for the period of notice that such an originator is
required to give of that intention, and the manner inwhich that notice is required to be given.
(4) Regulations made under subsection (1) —
(a) may declare any such regulation to be a penal regulation,
and
(b) may make different provision for different classes of direct
debit instructions.
(5) A person who contravenes a regulation under this section that
is declared to be a penal regulation commits an offence and is liableon summary conviction to a fine of \5,000 or imprisonment for 6
months or both.
(6) Regulations made under subsection (1) shall be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after they are madeand, if a resolution annulling them is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after the regu-lations are laid before it, the regulations shall be annulled accord-ingly but without prejudice to the validity of anything previouslydone under the regulations.
(7) In this section:
“direct debit instruction” means—
(a) a direct debit instruction, within the meaning given by the
Scheme Rules of the Direct Debit Scheme published byIrish Retail Electronic Payments Clearing Company Ltd[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
as updated to February 2008, being such an instruction
that is valid and operative within the terms of thoseRules, or
(b) a direct debit plus instruction, within the meaning of those
Rules, being such an instruction that is valid andoperative within the terms of those Rules;
“direct debit mandate” means a mandate, within the meaning given
by the Scheme Rulebook;
“originator” means the person in whose favour a direct debit instruc-
tion or direct debit mandate has been given;
“Scheme Rulebook” means the SEPA Core Direct Debit Scheme
Rulebook Version 3.3 approved by the European Payments Council
on 31 March 2009, or any later version of that Rulebook approvedby that Council;
“SEPA Scheme” means the SEPA Core Direct Debit Scheme set
out in the Scheme Rulebook.
PART 3
Transfer of Assets of Certain Pension Funds to National
Pensions Reserve Fund
3.—(1) In this Part:
“Act of 1990” means the Pensions Act 1990;“Act of 2000” means the National Pensions Reserve Fund Act 2000;“additional voluntary contributions” has the same meaning as in the
Act of 1990;
“assets” shall be construed in accordance with subsection (2) ;
“benefits” includes pensions, gratuities and any other allowances
payable under a relevant pension scheme;
“the Commission” means the National Pensions Reserve Fund
Commission;
“covered other pension fund” means a pension fund referred to in
column A ofPart 2 ofSchedule 1 ;
“covered pension fund” means a covered other pension fund or a
covered university pension fund;
“covered university pension fund” means a pension fund referred to
incolumn A ofPart 1 ofSchedule 1 ;
“relevant body”, in relation to a covered pension fund and the rel-
evant pension scheme for the fund, means the body specified for therelevant covered pension fund in column B of the relevant item in
Schedule 1 ;
“relevant Minister” means—
7Pt.2 S.2
Interpretation ( Part
3).Pt.3 S.3
References to
“relevant pensionscheme”.
Transfer orders.
8[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(a) in relation to a covered university pension fund and its
relevant pension scheme, the Minister for Education andScience, or
(b) in relation to a covered other pension fund and its relevant
pension scheme, the Minister specified for the fund incolumn C of the relevant item in Part 2 ofSchedule 1 ;
“relevant pension scheme”, in relation to a covered pension fund,
has the meaning given by section 4 ;
“Reserve Fund” means the National Pensions Reserve Fund estab-
lished by the Act of 2000;
“transfer order” means an order made under section 5(1) ;
“university pension scheme” means the relevant pension scheme in
relation to a covered university pension fund.
(2) A reference in this Part to the assets of a fund is a reference
to—
(a) in the case of a fund that is established as a trust, the assets
subject to the trust, and
(b) in the case of a covered pension fund that is not estab-
lished as a trust, the assets held by the relevant body con-cerned for the purposes of the fund,
but does not include any assets identified by the fund as being held
for the purposes of a defined contribution scheme (within the mean-ing of the Act of 1990) financed by additional voluntary con-tributions.
4.—(1) In this Part, a reference to the relevant pension scheme in
relation to a covered pension fund is a reference—
(a) if no transfer order has been made in relation to the fund,
to the pension scheme for the purposes of which the fundwas established, or
(b) if a transfer order has been made in relation to the fund,
to the pension scheme contained in the instruments orprovisions specified for that purpose in the order.
(2) On and after the date of effect of a transfer order in relation
to a covered pension fund, the provisions of that order that specifythe instruments or provisions that contain the relevant pensionscheme are conclusive as to those instruments or provisions.
5.—(1) The Minister for Finance where that Minister is the rel-
evant Minister in relation to a covered pension fund, and in anyother case the relevant Minister in relation to the covered pensionfund concerned acting with the consent of the Minister for Finance,may make a transfer order in relation to the fund.
(2) Before making a transfer order in relation to a covered pen-
sion fund the relevant Minister shall consult—[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(a) in the case of a fund that is constituted as a trust, the trus-
tees of that trust, and
(b) the board of directors or other governing body of the rel-
evant body for the fund,
to the extent that he or she considers necessary or reasonable in
the circumstances.
(3) Consultation that took place before the passing of this Act
with the persons concerned satisfies the obligation in subsection (2) .
(4) A transfer order—
(a) shall specify its date of effect,
(b) shall either set out a list of the instruments or provisions
that contain the relevant pension scheme, or containsome other appropriate means of identifying those instru-ments or provisions, and
(c) may make any provision necessary to give effect to the
transfer of assets under the order.
(5) In subsection (4) “instrument” includes a trust deed, a univer-
sity statute and a college statute.
(6) Notice of the making of a transfer order shall be published as
soon as practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(7) A transfer order shall be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made.
6.—(1) On the date of effect of a transfer order in relation to a
covered pension fund, the assets of the fund are by virtue of thissection transferred to the Reserve Fund, and thereafter form part ofthe assets of that Fund.
(2) On the date of effect of a transfer order in relation to a
covered pension fund—
(a) any trust in relation to the assets of the fund is terminated,
(b) the trustees under any such trust cease to be trustees, and
cease to be liable as trustees for anything done in relationto that fund on or after the date of effect,
(c) the relevant body ceases to be liable in relation to the fund
for anything done on or after the date of effect, and
(d) the provisions of any trust deed, university statute, college
statute or other instrument or instruments (other thanprovisions specified in the transfer order as setting outpart of the relevant pension scheme) constituting thefund cease to have effect.
(3) If a trust deed in relation to a covered pension fund contains
any provision to the effect that the relevant pension scheme ceasesto operate on the termination of the trust, then the provision is ofno effect to the extent that it so provides.
9Pt.3 S.5
Effect of transfer
order on assets offunds.Pt.3
Relevant pension
scheme to continueafter making oftransfer order.
Transfer of assets
under transferorder.
Application of
certain other Acts.
Value of assets
transferred to beoffset againstcontributions toReserve Fund.
10[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
7.—(1) Where a transfer order has been made in relation to a
covered pension fund, the relevant pension scheme continues tooperate, subject to this Part, on and after the coming into effect ofthe order.
(2) If before the making of a transfer order in relation to a
covered pension fund the board of directors or other governing bodyof the relevant body concerned were not the administrators of therelevant covered pension scheme, on the date of effect of the orderthat board of directors or other governing body becomes the admin-istrators of the scheme.
(3) The persons who were members, immediately before the mak-
ing of a transfer order in relation to a covered pension fund, of therelevant pension scheme continue, on and after the coming intoeffect of the order, to be members of the scheme. For all purposeseach such member’s membership of the scheme is to be taken tohave been uninterrupted.
8.—(1) The transfer of an asset under a transfer order is not sub-
ject to any form of taxation.
(2) Any instrument necessary to give full effect to or record a
transfer of an asset under a transfer order is not subject to stampduty.
9.—(1) A transfer order has effect for the purposes of this Part
notwithstanding anything in the Act of 1990.
(2) The Act of 1990 continues to apply to a relevant pension
scheme after the date of effect of a transfer order in relation to thecovered pension fund concerned to the same extent as that Actapplied to the scheme before that date.
(3) Notwithstanding section 6(1)( c) (as amended by section 3( b)
of the Investment of the National Pensions Reserve Fund and Mis-cellaneous Provisions Act 2009) of the Act of 2000, where assetstransferred under a transfer order include securities issued undersection 54(1) of the Finance Act 1970, the Commission may hold ordispose of those securities as it sees fit.
(4) Nothing in this Part affects the operation of section 25(8) of
the Universities Act 1997 so far as it relates to superannuation.
10.—(1) Where a transfer order has been made in relation to a
covered pension fund, the value of the assets transferred pursuant tothe order shall be taken to be in satisfaction or part-satisfaction, asthe case requires, of the obligation of the Minister for Finance undersection 18(2) of the Act of 2000 to make contributions to the ReserveFund in the current year.
(2) If the aggregate value of assets transferred to the Reserve
Fund under transfer orders in a year, added to any contributionsmade to the Reserve Fund in the same year under subsections (2),(5A) and (5C) of section 18 (as amended by section 6( c) of the
Investment of the National Pensions Reserve Fund and Miscel-laneous Provisions Act 2009) of the Act of 2000, is greater than theamount required to be paid into the Reserve Fund in that year undersection 18(2) of the Act of 2000, the excess amount shall be taken to[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
be in satisfaction or part-satisfaction, as the case requires, of the
amount required under that section to be paid into that Fund in anysubsequent year or years.
(3) For the purposes of subsections (1) and (2)—
(a) as soon as practicable after a transfer order is made in
relation to a covered pension fund, the trustees of thefund (or, where there is no trust deed, the board or gov-erning body of the relevant body in relation to the fund)shall cause a valuation, on the same basis as a valuationof resources for the purpose of an actuarial valuationunder Part IV of the Act of 1990, to be made of the assetsof the fund as at the date of effect of the transfer order,and
(b) the Commission shall determine the value of the assets of
the fund, as at the date of effect of the transfer order, inconsultation with the Minister, having regard to thatvaluation.
11.—(1) If before the coming into effect of a transfer order in
relation to a covered pension fund a provision of the relevant pen-sion scheme conferred a discretion in relation to one or moremembers’ rights or benefits, the provision continues in effect afterthe coming into effect of the order, but the discretion is to be exer-cised, where the Minister for Finance is the relevant Minister inrelation to the scheme, by that Minister, and in any other case bythe relevant Minister in relation to the scheme and the Minister forFinance acting jointly.
(2) After the coming into effect of a transfer order in relation to
a covered pension fund, the Minister for Finance where that Ministeris the relevant Minister in relation to the scheme, and in any othercase the relevant Minister in relation to the scheme and the Ministerfor Finance acting jointly, may delegate, in writing, the exercise of adiscretion referred to in subsection (1) —
(a) in the case of a university pension scheme, to the Higher
Education Authority or the governing body of the rel-evant body concerned, and
(b) in the case of any other relevant pension scheme, to the
board of directors or other governing body of the rel-evant body concerned.
12.—(1) After a transfer order has been made in relation to a
covered pension fund, the relevant pension scheme has effect, inrelation to the making of contributions by members and theemployers concerned and in relation to benefits, in accordance withsubsections (2) to(5).
(2) An obligation to make contributions referred to in subsection
(1)has effect as an obligation—
(a) in the case of each member’s obligation to make contri-
butions, to make those contributions to the relevant bodyconcerned, or to permit the relevant body to withholdthose contributions from salary, wages or other paymentsdue, in each case at the same rate as immediately beforethe date of effect of the relevant transfer order, and
11Pt.3 S.10
Exercise of
discretions underrelevant pensionscheme aftermaking of transferorder.
Continuation of
scheme regardingobligations andbenefits.Pt.3 S.12
Changes in rules of
covered pensionschemes.
Complaints and
disputes.
12[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(b) in the case of an employer’s obligation to make contri-
butions, to make those contributions at the same rate asimmediately before the date of effect of the order,
to be paid into or disposed of for the benefit of the Exchequer in
accordance with the directions of the Minister for Finance or other-wise paid or disposed of as that Minister may direct.
(3) After a transfer order has been made in relation to a covered
pension fund, any right of members of the relevant pension schemeto make voluntary contributions (including contributions for any pur-chase of notional service and buyback of years, repayment of a mar-riage gratuity and a transfer value paid in to the benefit of themember, but not including additional voluntary contributions treatedunder the Act of 1990 as paid to a defined contribution scheme(within the meaning given by that Act), or contributions to a PRSA(within the meaning given by that Act)) to the scheme continues tohave effect according to the terms of the scheme.
(4) As soon as practicable after the coming into effect of a
transfer order in relation to a covered pension fund, the relevantbody in relation to the relevant pension scheme shall set up, subjectto the approval of the Minister for Finance where that Minister isthe relevant Minister in relation to the scheme, and in any other casethe relevant Minister in relation to the scheme and the Minister forFinance, an appropriate mechanism to account separately for contri-butions referred to in subsections (2) and (3).
(5) On and after the coming into effect of a transfer order in
relation to a covered pension fund, the obligation to pay benefits inaccordance with the relevant pension scheme becomes an obligationof the relevant body in relation to the scheme.
(6) If the aggregate of members and employers’ contributions
paid to or withheld or retained by a relevant body under subsections
(2)and (3)(being contributions that the Minister has directed the
body to apply to the payment of benefits under the relevant pensionscheme) are insufficient to meet the body’s obligations to pay thosebenefits in accordance with the scheme, the Minister for Financeshall make good the deficiency by payments to the relevant bodyfrom funds provided by the Oireachtas for the purpose.
13.—(1) Section 25(7) of the Universities Act 1997 and the Fifth
Schedule to that Act continue to apply in relation to a relevant pen-sion scheme that is a university pension scheme after a transfer orderis made in relation to the relevant covered pension fund, but thatsection and Schedule are not to be taken to authorise the amendmentof the order.
(2) On and from the passing of this Act, a relevant pension
scheme (other than a relevant pension scheme to which subsection
(1)applies) may be amended only with the approval of the Minister
for Finance where that Minister is the relevant Minister in relationto the scheme, and in any other case the relevant Minister in relationto the scheme and the Minister for Finance.
14.—(1) Nothing in this Part or in any transfer order affects the
jurisdiction of the Pensions Ombudsman established by section 127of the Act of 1990 to investigate and determine a complaint or dis-pute in relation to the relevant pension scheme.[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
(2) If a relevant pension scheme confers on a Minister the func-
tion of settling disputes by arbitration or otherwise, after the cominginto effect of a transfer order in relation to the covered pension fundconcerned that Minister continues to have that function.
(3) If procedures of the kind referred to in section 132 of the Act
of 1990 have been established in relation to a relevant pensionscheme, after the coming into effect of a transfer order in relation tothe covered pension fund concerned those procedures continue tohave effect.
PART 4
Guarantees by Minister for Finance
15.—(1) A reference to a guarantor in paragraph 3(2)( e)o f
Schedule 1 to the Prospectus (Directive 2003/71/EC) Regulations2005 (S.I. No. 324 of 2005) shall be taken not to include the Ministerfor Finance.
(2) Nothing in section 41 of the Investment Funds, Companies
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2005 renders the Minister for Fin-ance liable to pay compensation to any person who acquires anysecurity the issue of which has been guaranteed by that Minister.
(3) No action or other proceeding whatsoever lies or is maintain-
able against the Minister for Finance in respect of any loss or damagealleged to have been caused or contributed to by any statement, mis-statement or omission of information in any statement in a prospec-tus, offering circular or other offering document relating to anysecurities guaranteed by that Minister.
PART 5
Amendments of other Acts
16.—The Central Bank Act 1989 is amended as set out in Part 1
ofSchedule 2 .
17.—(1) The Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008 is
amended as set out in Part 2 ofSchedule 2 .
(2) This section comes into operation on a day that the Minister
for Finance may by order appoint.
18.—The Insurance (No. 2) Act 1983 is amended as set out in Part
3ofSchedule 2 .
19.—The Insurance Act 1989 is amended as set out in Part 4 of
Schedule 2 .
20.—The Netting of Financial Contracts Act 1995 is amended as
set out in Part 5 ofSchedule 2 .
13Pt.3 S.14
Construction of
certain provisionswhen Minister forFinance guaranteesnon-equitysecurities, etc.
Amendment of the
Central Bank Act1989.
Amendment of the
Credit Institutions(Financial Support)Act 2008.
Amendment of the
Insurance (No. 2)Act 1983.
Amendment of
Insurance Act 1989.
Amendment of
Netting of FinancialContracts Act 1995.Pt.5
Amendment of
TaxesConsolidation Act1997.
Section 3.
14[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
21.—The Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 is amended as set out in
Part 6 ofSchedule 2 .
SCHEDULE 1
Covered Pension Funds
PART 1
University Pension Funds
Column A Column B
Fund Body
University of Dublin Trinity College University of Dublin Trinity CollegePension Fund
University College Dublin Pension Fund University College Dublin
University College Cork Pension Funds University College Cork
The Joint Pension Fund, National National University of Ireland,University of Ireland, Galway Galway
National University of Ireland, Maynooth National University of Ireland,Pension Plan Maynooth
National University of Ireland General National University of IrelandPension Scheme Fund
PART 2
Other Pension funds
Column A Column B Column C
Fund Body Relevant Minister
Industrial Development Forfa ´s Minister for Enterprise,
Authority Superannuation Trade andFund Employment
Shannon Free Airport SFADCo Minister for Enterprise,Development Company Trade andLimited Superannuation EmploymentFund
An Foras A ´iseanna Saothair FA ´S Minister for Enterprise,
(Closed) Superannuation Trade andScheme Fund Employment
Irish Goods Council Pension Forfa ´s Minister for Enterprise,
Fund Trade and
Employment
An Bord Bia An Bord Bia Minister forSuperannuation Fund Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food
Arts Council Pension Fund Arts Council Minister for Arts,
Sport and Tourism
Regional Tourism Pension Fa ´ilte Ireland Minister for Arts,
Scheme Fund Sport and Tourism
Fa´ilte Ireland Contributory Fa ´ilte Ireland Minister for Arts,
Pension and Death Benefits Sport and TourismScheme (formerly known asCERT)
The Institute of Public The Institute of Public Minister for FinanceAdministration AdministrationSuperannuation Fund[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Column A Column B Column C
Fund Body Relevant Minister
The Economic and Social The Economic and Minister for Finance
Research Institute Pension Social ResearchPlan Institute
The Economic and Social The Economic and Minister for FinanceResearch Institute Social ResearchSuperannuation Plan Institute
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments of Other Acts
PART 1
Amendment of the Central Bank Act 1989
Item Provision Amendment
amended
1 Section 75(1) Substitute:
“(1) Subject to subsections (1A) and (1B), this
Chapter applies to an acquisition by a person or morethan one person acting in concert of shares or otherinterest in a holder of a licence.
(1A) This Chapter does not apply to an acquisition
if—
(a) after the acquisition the proportion of
shares in the licence holder held by theacquiring person or persons would notexceed the prescribed percentage, and
(b) where the licence holder concerned is a
body incorporated in the State, theacquisition, together with any otherinterest in the licence holder alreadyheld or controlled (directly or indirectly)by the acquiring person or persons,would not confer a right to appoint orremove some or all of the board ofdirectors or committee of managementof the licence holder.
(1B) This Chapter does not apply to an acquisition
that is subject to notification and prudentialassessment under the European Communities(Licensing and Supervision of Credit Institutions)Regulations 1992 (S.I. No. 395 of 1992).
(1C) An acquisition to which this Chapter applies is
referred to in this Chapter as an ‘acquiringtransaction’.”.
15Sch. 1
Section 16.Sch. 2
Section 17.
16[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
PART 2
Amendment of the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act
2008
Item Provision Amendment
amended
1 Section 6(1) After “the relevant date,” insert “and in accordance
with this section,”.
2 Section 6(3) Substitute:
“(3) Financial support provided under this section
shall not continue beyond—
(a) 29 September 2010, or
(b) a later date specified by the Minister by
order.
(3A) The Minister may specify a date under
subsection (3)(b) if and only if—
(a) he or she is satisfied, after consulting the
Governor and the Regulatory Authority,that the circumstances set out in section2 exist and are likely to continue to existuntil the date to be specified, and
(b) he or she is satisfied that it is necessary in
the public interest that assistancecontinue to be provided under thissection until that date.
(3B) The Minister may specify by order a period or
periods during which credit institutions may incurborrowings, liabilities and obligations in respect ofwhich financial support may be provided under thissection.”.
3 Section 6 After section 6(19), insert:
“(20) In the event of there being any doubt or
uncertainty over whether financial support provided orproposed to be provided in respect of a borrowing,liability or obligation of a credit institution orsubsidiary may be provided under this section, theMinister may determine the matter. The Minister’sdetermination is conclusive.”.[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
PART 3
Amendment of the Insurance (No. 2) Act 1983
Item Provision Amendment
amended
1 Section 1(1), Delete.
definition of “‘authorisation’and ‘non-lifeinsurance’ ”
2 Section 1(1), Substitute:
definition of
“ ‘the business’ in relation to an insurer or reinsurer “the business”
includes the business of managing investments and
assets held by the insurer or reinsurer;”.
3 Section 1(1), Substitute:
definition of “
“ ‘insurance business’ means non-life business or life ‘insurer’ and
business; ‘policy’ ”
‘insurer’ means the holder of an authorisation issued
by the Bank under—
(a) the Non-Life Insurance Regulations,
(b) the Life Assurance Regulations,
(c) the Non-Life Insurance Framework
Regulations, or
(d) the Life Assurance Framework
Regulations,
to carry on a class or description of insurance
business;
‘Life Assurance Framework Regulations’ means the
European Communities (Life Assurance) FrameworkRegulations 1994 (S.I. No. 360 of 1994);
‘Life Assurance Regulations’ means the European
Communities (Life Assurance) Regulations 1984 (S.I.No. 57 of 1984);”.
4 Section 1(1), Substitute:
definition of
“ ‘Non-Life Insurance Framework Regulations’ means “policyholder”
the European Communities (Non-Life Insurance)
Framework Regulations 1994 (S.I. No. 359 of 1994);
‘Non-Life Insurance Regulations’ means the European
Communities (Non-Life Insurance) Regulations 1976(S.I. No. 115 of 1976);
‘policy’ means a document or other writing by which a
contract—
(a) of non-life insurance (within the meaning
of the Non-Life Insurance Regulationsor the Non-Life Insurance FrameworkRegulations) or life insurance (within themeaning of the Life AssuranceRegulations or the Life AssuranceFramework Regulations), or
(b) of reinsurance (within the meaning of the
Reinsurance Regulations),
is made or agreed to be made or that is evidence of
such a contract;
17Sch. 2
Section 18.Sch. 2
18[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
amended
‘policyholder’, in relation to an insurer or a reinsurer,means a person (other than the issuing insurer orreinsurer) who is a party to a policy issued by theinsurer or reinsurer;”.
5 Section 1(1), Substitute:
definition of
“ ‘the Reinsurance Regulations’ means the European “the
Communities (Reinsurance) Regulations 2006 (S.I. Regulations”
No. 380 of 2006);
‘reinsurer’ means the holder of an authorisation under
the Reinsurance Regulations;
‘the supervisory Regulations’ means—
(a) the Life Assurance Regulations,
(b) the Non-Life Insurance Regulations,
(c) the Reinsurance Regulations,
(d) the Non-Life Insurance Framework
Regulations,
(e) the Life Assurance Framework
Regulations, and
(f) the European Communities (Insurance and
Reinsurance Groups SupplementarySupervision) Regulations 2007 (S.I. No.366 of 2007).”.
6 Section 1 Insert after subsection (2):
“(3) Unless the contrary intention appears, a
reference in sections 2 to 6 of this Act to an insurerincludes a reinsurer.”.
7 Section Substitute “the supervisory Regulations” for “the
2(2)( a)(iii) Regulations”.
8 Section 2(2)( b) Substitute “insurance business or reinsurance
business” for “non-life insurance business”.
9 Section 2(8) Substitute:
“(8) In proceedings upon a petition presented
under this Act, evidence that the matters set out insubsection (2)( a) pertained in relation to an insurer at
the close of the period to which the latest returns ofthe insurer to the Bank under—
(a) the Insurance Acts 1909 to 2000,
(b) the supervisory Regulations, or
(c) the European Communities (Non-Life
Insurance Accounts) Regulations 1995(S.I. No. 202 of 1995),
relate, or on any later date, shall be evidence that
such matters pertain in relation to the insurer at thetime of the hearing of the proceedings.”.
10 After section 2, insert:
“Administrator’s power of sale, etc.
2A.—(1) An administrator appointed under section
2 has, and shall be deemed always to have had, powerto dispose of all or any part of the business,undertaking or assets of the insurer concerned and tocarry on any remaining business including thesettlement of liabilities, with a view to the orderlycompletion of the administration.[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
amended
(2) Where such an administrator appointed before
20 March 1989 has disposed of all or any part of thebusiness, undertaking or assets of an insurerauthorised under the Non-Life Insurance Regulations,there may, with the approval of the court, be paid outof the Fund to the administrator such amounts as are,in the opinion of the court, required to enable theadministrator to continue the administration with aview to its completion in an orderly manner.”.
11 Section 4 Substitute “insurance business or reinsurance
business” for “non-life insurance business”.
12 Section 6 Substitute “insurance business or reinsurance
business” for “non-life insurance business”.
PART 4
Amendment of the Insurance Act 1989
Item Provision Amendment
amended
1 Section 33 Delete.
PART 5
Amendment of the Netting of Financial Contracts Act 1995
Item Provision Amendment
amended
1 Section Substitute:
1,
“ ‘party’ has the meaning given in section 1A;”. definition
of“party”
2 After section 1, insert:
“Meaning of ‘party’.
1A.—(1) In this Act, ‘party’ means, subject to subsections
(2) and (3), a person constituting one of the parties to anagreement.
(2) In this Act ‘party’ includes, and shall be deemed always
to have included—
(a) any number of persons who share a single,
identical interest in the agreement referred tosubsequently in this definition if there is nodifferentiation in the rights and obligations ofeach of them in that agreement,
(b) the partners in a partnership or limited
partnership, including any limited partnershipestablished under the Investment LimitedPartnerships Act 1994 or the LimitedPartnerships Act 1907, and
(c) the participants in—
(i) a common contractual fund authorised
pursuant to the Investment Funds,Companies and Miscellaneous
19Sch. 2
Section 19.
Section 20.Sch. 2
20[No. 14.] [2009.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
Item Pro- Amendment
vision
amended
Provisions Act 2005, the European
Communities (Undertakings forCollective Investment in TransferableSecurities) Regulations 2003 (S.I. No.211 of 2003) or the laws of a MemberState (other than the State) adopted toimplement Council Directive No.85/611/EEC of 20 December 1985
1as
amended, or
(ii) a sub-fund of a common contractual fund
referred to in subparagraph (i),
(whether or not the fund is acting through a
manager or a delegate of a manager),
in circumstances where any of such persons or such partners
(acting in their capacity as such) or such fund or sub-fundenters into an agreement.
(3) In this Act ‘party’ does not include, and shall be
deemed never to have included, any person in whose favour aparty to an agreement has created any interest by way ofsecurity in any of the party’s rights, title and interest in and tothat agreement.”.
1OJ L375, 31/12/1985, p.3.[2009.] [ No. 14.] Financial Measures (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 .
PART 6
Amendment of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997
Item Provision Amendment
amended
1 Section 230A Insert “the National Pensions Reserve Fund,” before
“the National Pensions Reserve Fund Commissionor”.
2 Section Substitute “section 730E(3),” for “section 730E(3),
730D(2)( b) or”.
3 Section Substitute “section 730E(3A),” for “section
730D(2)( c) 730E(3A).”.
4 Section After section 730D(2)( c), insert:
730D(2)
“(d) where the life policy is an asset held by the
National Pensions Reserve Fund Commissionor the State acting through that Commission,and that Commission has made a declaration tothat effect to the assurance company, or
(e) where the life policy is an asset held by a
Commission investment vehicle (within themeaning given by section 2 of the NationalPensions Reserve Fund Act 2000 (as amendedby section 2 of the Investment of the NationalPensions Reserve Fund and MiscellaneousProvisions Act 2009)) or the State actingthrough a Commission investment vehicle andthe Commission investment vehicle has made adeclaration to that effect to the assurancecompany.”.
5 Schedule 15, Insert after paragraph 34A:
Part 1
“34B. The National Pensions Reserve Fund.”.
21Sch. 2
Section 21.