————————
Number 38of2009
————————
LABOUR SERVICES (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definition.
2. Amendment of section 1 of Principal Act.3. Amendment of section 6 of Principal Act.4. Accountability of Director General of An Foras Áiseanna
Saothair to Committee of Public Accounts.
5. Accountability of Director General of An Foras Áiseanna
Saothair to other committees of Houses of Oireachtas.
6. Disclosure of interests.7. Protection of persons reporting certain matters.8. Amendment of section 13 of Principal Act.9. Amendment of Part I of Schedule to Principal Act.
10. Repeal of Part II of Schedule to Principal Act.11. Redress for penalisation contrary to section 13B of Princi-
pal Act.
12. Construction of references to Schedule to Principal Act.13. Short title, collective citation, construction and com-
mencement.
————————
12[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
Acts Referred to
Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33
Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 8Courts Act 1981 1981, No. 11Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 1995, No. 22Labour Services Act 1987 1987, No. 15Labour Services Acts 1987 and 1999Redundancy Payments Act 1967 1967, No. 21Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005 2005, No. 10Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2007————————
Number 38of2009
————————
LABOUR SERVICES (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND THE LABOUR SERVICES ACT 1987;
AND TO PROVIDE FOR MATTERS CONNECTEDTHEREWITH.
[9th December , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act “Principal Act ”means the Labour Services Act
1987.
2.—Section 1 of the Principal Act is amended by the insertion, in
subsection (1), of the following definitions:
“‘Act of 1995 ’means the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995;
‘material interest ’shall be construed in accordance with section
2(3) of the Act of 1995;
‘serious wrongdoing ’includes breach of duty by a member or
member of staff of An Foras, or a consultant, adviser or otherperson, in relation to An Foras. ”.
3.—Section 6 of the Principal Act is amended by the insertion of
the following subsections:
“(6) The Director General shall hold office for such period,
not exceeding 5 years from the date of his appointment, as theMinister shall determine.
(7) Subject to subsection (8), where the Director General ’s
term of office expires by the effluxion of time he shall be eligibleto be reappointed to that office.
(8) Where the Director General has served 2 terms of office
(including a term of office commenced or completed before thecommencement of section 3 of the Labour Services
(Amendment) Act 2009 ) he shall not be eligible to be
reappointed to that office.
(9) The Director General shall, ex officio , be a member of
An Foras. ”.
3Definition.
Amendment of
section 1 ofPrincipal Act.
Amendment of
section 6 ofPrincipal Act.Accountability of
Director General ofAn Foras Áiseanna
Saothair toCommittee ofPublic Accounts.
Accountability of
Director General ofAn Foras Áiseanna
Saothair to othercommittees ofHouses ofOireachtas.
4[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
4.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the follow-
ing section:
“6A.—(1) The Director General shall, whenever required in
writing to do so by the Committee of D áilÉireann established
under the Standing Orders of D áilÉireann to examine and
report to D áilÉireann on the appropriation accounts and
reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General (hereafter inthis section referred to as the ‘Committee ’), give evidence to
that Committee on —
(a) the regularity and propriety of the transactions
recorded or required to be recorded in any book orother record of account subject to audit by theComptroller and Auditor General that An Foras isrequired by this Act to prepare,
(b) the economy and efficiency of An Foras in the use of
its resources,
(c) the systems, procedures and practices employed by
An Foras for the purpose of evaluating the effective-ness of its operations, and
(d) any matter affecting An Foras referred to in a special
report of the Comptroller and Auditor Generalunder section 11(2) of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral (Amendment) Act 1993, or in any otherreport of the Comptroller and Auditor General (inso far as it relates to a matter specified in paragraph(a), (b)o r( c)) that is laid before D áilÉireann.
(2) In the performance of his duties under this section, the
Director General shall not question or express an opinion onthe merits of any policy of the Government or a Minister of theGovernment or on the merits of the objectives of such a policy. ”.
5.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the follow-
ing section:
“6B.—(1) In this section ‘Committee ’means a Committee
appointed by either House of the Oireachtas or jointly by bothHouses of the Oireachtas (other than the Committee referredto in section 6A (inserted by section 4 of the Labour Services
(Amendment) Act 2009 ) or the Committee on Members ’
Interests of D áilÉireann or the Committee on Members ’
Interests of Seanad Éireann) or a subcommittee of such a
Committee.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the Director General shall, at
the request in writing of a Committee, attend before it to givean account in respect of matters relating to the general admini-stration of An Foras that fall within the terms of reference ofthe Committee.
(3) The Director General shall not be required to give an
account before a Committee in respect of any matter that hasbeen, or is or is likely to be, the subject of proceedings before acourt or tribunal in the State.[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(4) Where the Director General is of the opinion that a
matter in respect of which he is requested to give an accountbefore a Committee is a matter to which subsection (3) applies,he shall, as soon as may be after the making of the request,inform the Committee in writing of that opinion and the reasonsfor the opinion, unless the information is conveyed to the Com-mittee at a time when the Director General is before it.
(5) Where the Director General has informed a Committee
of his opinion in accordance with subsection (4) and the Com-mittee wish to proceed with the request concerned, the Chair-person of the Committee may, on behalf of the Committee,apply to the High Court in a summary manner for a determi-nation of the question whether the matter is one to which sub-section (3) applies, and the High Court shall determine thematter.
(6) Where the Director General informs a Committee, in
accordance with subsection (4), that he is of the opinion that amatter in respect of which he is requested to give an accountbefore the Committee is a matter to which subsection (3)applies, then, subject to subsection (7), he shall not attendbefore the Committee to give an account in respect of thematter.
(7) If, upon an application under subsection (5), the High
Court determines that the matter concerned is one to which sub-section (3) applies, the Committee shall withdraw the requestreferred to in subsection (2), but if the High Court determinesthat subsection (3) does not apply, the Director General shallattend before the Committee to give an account in respect ofthe matter. ”.
6.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the following
new sections:
“Disclosure by
members ofAn Foras ofcertaininterests.9A.—(1) Where at a meeting of An Foras any
of the following matters arises, namely —
(a) an arrangement to which An Foras is a
party or a proposed such arrange-ment, or
(b) a contract or other agreement with An
Foras or a proposed such contract orother agreement,
then, any member of An Foras present at the
meeting who otherwise than in his capacity as sucha member has a material interest in the mattershall —
(i) at the meeting, disclose to An Foras the
fact of such interest and the naturethereof,
(ii) absent himself from the meeting or that
part of the meeting during which thematter is being discussed,
5S.5
Disclosure of
interests.S.6
6[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(iii) take no part in any deliberation of An
Foras relating to the matter, and
(iv) not vote on a decision relating to the
matter.
(2) A member of An Foras who, otherwise than
in his capacity as such a member has a materialinterest in —
(a) an arrangement or proposed arrange-
ment to which paragraph ( a) of subsec-
tion (1) applies, or
(b) a contract or other agreement or a pro-
posed contract or other agreement towhich paragraph ( b) of that subsec-
tion applies,
shall neither influence nor seek to influence any
decision to be made by An Foras in relationthereto.
(3) Where a material interest is disclosed pur-
suant to this section, the disclosure shall berecorded in the minutes of the meeting concernedand, for so long as the matter to which the disclos-ure relates is being dealt with by the meeting, themember by whom the disclosure is made shall notbe counted in the quorum for the meeting.
(4) Where at a meeting of An Foras a question
arises as to whether or not a course of conduct, ifpursued by a member of An Foras, would consti-tute a failure by him to comply with the require-ments of subsection (1), the question may, subjectto subsection (5), be determined by the chairmanof the meeting, whose decision shall be final, andwhere such a question is so determined, particularsof the determination shall be recorded in theminutes of the meeting.
(5) Where at a meeting of An Foras, the chair-
man of the meeting is the member in respect ofwhich a question to which subsection (4) appliesfalls to be determined, then the other members ofAn Foras attending the meeting shall choose oneof their number to be chairman of the meeting forthe purpose of determining the questionconcerned.
Disclosure by
directors ofsubsidiary ofcertaininterests.9B.—(1) Where at a meeting of the board of
the subsidiary any of the following matters arises,namely —
(a) an arrangement to which the subsidiary
is a party or a proposed such arrange-ment, or
(b) a contract or other agreement with the
subsidiary or a proposed such contractor other agreement,[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
then, any director of the subsidiary present at the
meeting who otherwise than in his capacity as sucha director has a material interest in the mattershall —
(i) at the meeting, disclose to the board of
the subsidiary the fact of such interestand the nature thereof,
(ii) absent himself from the meeting or that
part of the meeting during which thematter is being discussed,
(iii) take no part in any deliberation of the
board of the subsidiary relating to thematter, and
(iv) not vote on a decision relating to the
matter.
(2) A director of the subsidiary who, otherwise
than in his capacity as such a director has amaterial interest in —
(a) an arrangement or proposed arrange-
ment to which paragraph ( a) of subsec-
tion (1) applies, or
(b) a contract or other agreement or a pro-
posed contract or other agreement towhich paragraph ( b) of that subsec-
tion applies,
shall neither influence nor seek to influence any
decision to be made by the board of the subsidiaryin relation thereto.
(3) Where a material interest is disclosed pur-
suant to this section, the disclosure shall berecorded in the minutes of the meeting concernedand, for so long as the matter to which the disclos-ure relates is being dealt with by the meeting, thedirector by whom the disclosure is made shall notbe counted in the quorum for the meeting.
(4) Where at a meeting of the board of the sub-
sidiary a question arises as to whether or not acourse of conduct, if pursued by a director of thesubsidiary, would constitute a failure by him tocomply with the requirements of subsection (1),the question may, subject to subsection (5), bedetermined by the chairman of the meeting, whosedecision shall be final, and where such a questionis so determined, particulars of the determinationshall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
(5) Where at a meeting of the board of the sub-
sidiary, the chairman of the meeting is the directorin respect of which a question to which subsection(4) applies falls to be determined, then the otherdirectors of the subsidiary attending the meetingshall choose one of their number to be chairman
7S.6S.6
8[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
of the meeting for the purpose of determining the
question concerned.
(6) Where An Foras is satisfied that a director
of the subsidiary has contravened subsection (1)or (2), An Foras may, if it thinks fit, remove thatdirector from office and, where a person isremoved from office pursuant to this subsection,he shall thenceforth be disqualified for being adirector of the subsidiary.
Disclosure by
members ofstaff of AnForas ofcertaininterests.9C.—(1) Where a member of the staff of An
Foras has a material interest, otherwise than in hiscapacity as such a member, in any contract, agree-ment or arrangement, to which An Foras is aparty, or a proposed such contract, agreement orarrangement, that person shall —
(a) disclose to An Foras his interest and the
nature thereof,
(b) take no part in the negotiation of the
contract, agreement or arrangement orin any deliberation by An Foras ormembers of the staff of An Foras inrelation thereto, and
(c) neither influence nor seek to influence
a decision to be made in the matter normake any recommendation in relationto the contract, agreement orarrangement.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to contracts
or proposed contracts of employment of membersof the staff of An Foras with An Foras.
(3) Where a person contravenes this section An
Foras may make such alterations to the person ’s
terms and conditions of employment as it con-siders appropriate or terminate the person ’s con-
tract of employment.
Disclosure by
members ofstaff ofsubsidiary ofcertaininterests.9D.—(1) Where a member of the staff of the
subsidiary has a material interest, otherwise thanin his capacity as such a member, in any contract,agreement or arrangement, to which the subsidi-ary is a party, or a proposed such contract, agree-ment or arrangement, that person shall —
(a) disclose to the subsidiary his interest
and the nature thereof,
(b) take no part in the negotiation of the
contract, agreement or arrangement orin any deliberation by the subsidiary ormembers of the staff of the subsidiaryin relation thereto, and
(c) neither influence nor seek to influence
a decision to be made in the matter normake any recommendation in relation[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
to the contract, agreement or
arrangement.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to contracts
or proposed contracts of employment of membersof the staff of the subsidiary with the subsidiary.
(3) Where a person contravenes this section the
subsidiary may make such alterations to the per-son’s terms and conditions of employment as it
considers appropriate or terminate the person ’s
contract of employment. ”.
7.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the follow-
ing sections:
“Protection
from civilliability ofpersons whoreport certainmisconduct.13A. —(1) Where a person communicates his
opinion, whether in writing or otherwise, to amember of the Garda S íochána or a member of
An Foras that —
(a) an offence under this Act or any other
enactment has been or is beingcommitted,
(b) any provision of this Act or any other
enactment or rule of law has been or isbeing contravened, or
(c) there has been other serious wrong-
doing in relation to An Foras,
then, unless the person acts in bad faith, he shall
not be regarded as having committed any breachof duty towards any other person, and no personshall have a cause of action against the first-mentioned person in respect of that com-munication.
(2) Where a person communicates his opinion,
whether in writing or otherwise, to the Ministerthat a direction given by the Minister under thisAct has been or is being contravened then, unlessthe person acts in bad faith, he shall not beregarded as having committed any breach of dutytowards any other person, and no person shallhave a cause of action against the first-mentionedperson in respect of that communication.
(3) This section applies to a communication —
(a) that would, but for this section, consti-
tute a breach of duty by the personwho made it, or
(b) in respect of which, another person
would, but for this section, have acause of action against the person whomade it.
9S.6
Protection of
persons reportingcertain matters.S.7
10[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
Prohibition on
penalisation.13B. —(1) An employer shall not penalise or
threaten penalisation against an employee for —
(a) making a complaint to a member of the
Garda S íochána or a member of An
Foras that a provision of this Act, orany enactment or other rule of law, hasbeen or is being contravened,
(b) making a complaint to the Minister that
a direction given by him under this Acthas been or is being contravened,
(c) making a complaint to a member of An
Foras that there has been seriouswrongdoing in relation to An Foras,
(d) giving evidence in any proceedings
under this Act or any other enact-ment, or
(e) giving notice of his intention to do any
of the things referred to in the preced-ing paragraphs.
(2) Schedule 2 (inserted by section 11 of the
Labour Services (Amendment) Act 2009 ) shall
have effect for the purposes of subsection (1).
(3) If the penalisation of an employee, in con-
travention of subsection (1), constitutes a dismissalof the employee within the meaning of the UnfairDismissals Acts 1977 to 2007, relief may not begranted to the employee in respect of that penalis-ation both under Schedule 2 and under those Acts.
(4) In this section —
‘employee ’means —
(a) in relation to An Foras, a member of
the staff of An Foras, or
(b) in relation to the subsidiary, a member
of the staff of the subsidiary;
‘employer ’means An Foras or the subsidiary;
‘penalisation ’means any act or omission by an
employer or a person acting on behalf of anemployer that affects an employee to his detri-ment with respect to any term or condition of hisemployment, and, without prejudice to the gener-ality of the foregoing, includes —
(a) suspension, lay-off or dismissal
(including a dismissal within the mean-ing of the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977to 2007), or the threat of suspension,lay-off or dismissal,[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) demotion or loss of opportunity for
promotion,
(c) transfer of duties, change of location of
place of work, reduction in wages orchange in working hours,
(d) imposition or administration of any dis-
cipline, reprimand or other penalty(including a financial penalty), and
(e) coercion or intimidation.
False
statements.13C. —(1) A person who states to a member of
the Garda S íochána or a member of An Foras
that—
(a) an offence under this Act or any other
enactment has been or is beingcommitted,
(b) a provision of this Act, a provision of
any other enactment or any rule of lawhas been or is being contravened, or
(c) there has been serious wrongdoing by
any person in relation to An Foras,
knowing the statement to be false shall be guilty
of an offence.
(2) A person guilty of an offence under this
section shall be liable —
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 12 months orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \100,000 or imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 3 yearsor both. ”.
8.—Section 13 of the Principal Act is amended by the substitution
of the following subsection for subsection (3):
“(3) Nothing in subsection (1) shall prevent the disclosure
of information —
(a) in a report made to An Foras or by or on behalf of
An Foras to the Minister, or
(b) by a member of An Foras to the Minister. ”.
9.—Part I of the Schedule to the Principal Act is amended by —
(a) the substitution of the following paragraph for paragraph
2:
11S.7
Amendment of
section 13 ofPrincipal Act.
Amendment of Part
I of Schedule toPrincipal Act.S.9
12[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
“2. (1) An Foras shall consist of the following
members, that is to say —
(a) a chairman, and
(b) 10 ordinary members (including the Director
General).
(2) The members of An Foras shall be appointed by the
Minister, after consultation with the Minister for Edu-cation and Science and the Minister for Social and FamilyAffairs, from among persons who, in the opinion of theMinister, have experience of, and expertise in matters con-nected with —
(a) the functions of An Foras, or
(b) finance, trade, commerce, corporate governance
or public administration.
(3) Subject to subparagraph (5), the chairman of An
Foras shall hold office for such period not exceeding 5years from the date of his appointment, as the Ministershall determine.
(4) Subject to subparagraph (5), an ordinary member
of An Foras shall hold office for such period not exceeding5 years from the date of his appointment, as the Ministershall determine.
(5) Of the members of An Foras (other than the Direc-
tor General) first appointed after the commencement ofsection 9(a) of the Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 —
(a) such 3 members as the Minister shall determine
shall hold office for 3 years from the date oftheir appointment,
(b) such 3 members as the Minister shall determine
shall hold office for 4 years from the date oftheir appointment, and
(c) such 3 members as the Minister shall determine
shall hold office for 5 years from the date oftheir appointment.
(6) Subject to subparagraph (7), a member of An Foras
(other than the Director General) whose term of officeexpires by the effluxion of time shall be eligible forreappointment to An Foras.
(7) A member of An Foras (other than the Director
General) who has served 2 terms of office shall not beeligible for reappointment to An Foras, and any periodduring which a person serves as a member of An Foraspursuant to an appointment under paragraph 7 (insertedbysection 9(b) of the Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 ) shall be deemed for the purposes of this subpara-
graph to be a term of office.[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(8) The members of An Foras in office immediately
before the commencement of section 9(a) of the Labour
Services (Amendment) Act 2009 shall continue in office for
the period beginning on the date of such commencementand ending on the date of the first appointment ofmembers of An Foras under this paragraph after suchcommencement, and An Foras as constituted immediatelybefore such commencement shall during that period bedeemed to be validly constituted for all purposes. ”,
(b) the substitution of the following paragraph for paragraph
7:
“7. (1) If a member of An Foras (other than the Direc-
tor General) dies, resigns, ceases to be qualified for officeand ceases to hold office or is removed from office, theMinister may appoint a person to be a member of AnForas to fill the casual vacancy so occasioned.
(2) A person appointed to be a member of An Foras
pursuant to this paragraph shall hold office for —
(a) that period of the term of office of the member
who occasioned the casual vacancy concernedthat remains unexpired at the date of hisappointment, or
(b) such other period, not exceeding 5 years, as the
Minister may determine,
and shall, subject to subparagraph (7) of paragraph 2
(inserted by section 9(a) of the Labour Services
(Amendment) Act 2009 ), be eligible for reappointment as
a member of An Foras on the expiry of the said period. ”,
(c) the substitution of the following paragraph for paragraph
12:
“12. (1) The Minister may at any time remove from
office a member of An Foras and, in particular, mayremove such member from office if the Minister is satis-fied that —
(a) the member is not adequately performing his
functions, whether by reason of incapacitythrough illness or injury or for any otherreason,
(b) a material conflict of interest exists in relation
to the performance by the member of hisfunctions,
(c) the removal of the member is necessary or
expedient for the effective performance by AnForas of its functions,
(d) the member has contravened section 9A
(inserted by section 6 of the Labour Services
(Amendment) Act 2009) ,o r
(e) the member has contravened the Act of 1995.
13S.9S.9
Repeal of Part II of
Schedule toPrincipal Act.
Redress for
penalisationcontrary to section13B of PrincipalAct.
14[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(2) Where a person is removed from office pursuant to
subparagraph (1), he shall thenceforth be disqualified formembership of An Foras.
(3) A member of An Foras may resign from office by
notice in writing given to the Minister and the resignationshall take effect on the day on which the Minister receivesthe notice.
(4) A member of An Foras shall cease to be qualified
for office and shall cease to hold office if he —
(a) is adjudicated bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with
creditors,
(c) is convicted of an indictable offence in relation
to a company,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dis-
honesty, whether in connection with a com-pany or not,
(e) is the subject of an order under section 160 of
the Companies Act 1990,
(f) is sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a
court of competent jurisdiction, or
(g) ceases to be ordinarily resident in the State.
(5) A member of An Foras shall, subject to the pro-
visions of this Act, hold office upon such terms and con-ditions (including terms and conditions relating toremuneration and allowances) as may be determined bythe Minister, with the consent of the Minister forFinance. ”,
(d) the substitution of “7”for“9”in paragraph 16.
10.—Part II of the Schedule to the Principal Act is repealed.
11.—The Principal Act is amended by the insertion of the follow-
ing Schedule:
“SCHEDULE 2
Section 13B.
Redress for Contravention of Section 13B(1)
Complaints to rights commissioner.
1. (1) An employee or any trade union of which the
employee is a member, with the consent of the employee, maypresent a complaint to a rights commissioner that theemployee ’s employer has contravened subsection (1) of section
13B (inserted by section 7 of the Labour Services (Amendment)
Act 2009 ) in relation to the employee.[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(2) Where a complaint under subparagraph (1) is made, the
rights commissioner shall —
(a) give the parties an opportunity to be heard by the
commissioner and to present to the commissionerany evidence relevant to the complaint,
(b) give a decision in writing in relation to the com-
plaint, and
(c) communicate the decision to the parties.
(3) A decision of a rights commissioner under subparagraph
(2) shall do one or more of the following:
(a) declare that the complaint was or, as the case may be,
was not well founded,
(b) require the employer to take a specified course of
action,
(c) require the employer to pay to the employee compen-
sation of such amount (if any) as is just and equitablehaving regard to all the circumstances but notexceeding 2 years remuneration in respect of theemployee ’s employment.
(4) A rights commissioner shall not entertain a complaint
under this paragraph if it is presented to him after the expirationof the period of 6 months beginning on the date of the contra-vention to which the complaint relates.
(5) Notwithstanding subparagraph (4), a rights commissioner
may entertain a complaint under this paragraph presented tohim after the expiration of the period referred to in subpara-graph (4) (but not later than 12 months after such expiration) ifhe is satisfied that the failure to present the complaint withinthat period was due to reasonable cause.
(6) A complaint shall be presented by giving notice of it in
writing to a rights commissioner and the notice shall containsuch particulars and be in such form as may be specified fromtime to time by the Minister.
(7) A copy of a notice under subparagraph (6) shall be given
to the other party concerned by the rights commissionerconcerned.
(8) Proceedings under this paragraph before a rights com-
missioner shall be conducted otherwise than in public.
(9) A rights commissioner shall furnish the Labour Court
with a copy of each decision given by the commissioner undersubparagraph (2).
Appeal from decision of rights commissioner.
2. (1) A party concerned may appeal to the Labour Court
from a decision of a rights commissioner under paragraph 1 and,if the party does so, the Labour Court shall —
15S.11S.11
16[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(a) give the parties an opportunity to be heard by it and
to present to it any evidence relevant to the appeal,
(b) make a determination in writing in relation to the
appeal affirming, varying or setting aside thedecision, and
(c) communicate the determination to the parties.
(2) An appeal under this paragraph shall be initiated by the
party concerned, giving, within 6 weeks (or such greater periodas the Labour Court may determine in the particularcircumstances) from the date on which the decision to which itrelates was communicated to the party, a notice in writing to theLabour Court containing such particulars as are determined bythe Labour Court under subparagraph (4) and stating the inten-tion of the party concerned to appeal against the decision.
(3) A copy of a notice under subparagraph (2) shall be given
by the Labour Court to any other party concerned as soon aspracticable after the receipt of the notice by the Labour Court.
(4) The following matters, and the procedures to be followed
in relation to them, shall be determined by the Labour Court,namely:
(a) the procedure in relation to all matters concerning the
initiation and the hearing by the Labour Court ofappeals under this paragraph;
(b) the times and places of hearings of such appeals;
(c) the representation of the parties to such appeals;
(d) the publication and notification of determinations of
the Labour Court;
(e) the particulars to be contained in a notice under sub-
paragraph (2); and
(f) any matters consequential on, or incidental to, the
foregoing matters.
(5) The Minister may, at the request of the Labour Court,
refer a question of law arising in proceedings before it underthis paragraph to the High Court for its determination and thedetermination of the High Court shall be final and conclusive.
(6) A party to proceedings before the Labour Court under
this paragraph may appeal to the High Court from a determi-nation of the Labour Court on a point of law and the determi-nation of the High Court shall be final and conclusive.
(7) Section 39(17) of the Redundancy Payments Act 1967
shall apply in relation to proceedings before the Labour Courtunder this Part as it applies to matters referred to the Employ-
ment Appeals Tribunal under that section with —
(a) the substitution in that provision of references to the
Labour Court for references to the Tribunal,[2009.] [ No. 38.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) the deletion in paragraph ( d) of that provision of
‘registered ’, and
(c) the substitution in paragraph ( e) of that provision of
‘a fine not exceeding \5,000 ’for‘a fine not exceeding
twenty pounds ’.
Paragraphs 1 and 2: supplemental provisions.
3. (1) Where a decision of a rights commissioner in relation
to a complaint under this Schedule has not been carried out bythe employer concerned in accordance with its terms, the timefor bringing an appeal against the decision has expired and nosuch appeal has been brought, the employee concerned maybring the complaint before the Labour Court and the LabourCourt shall, without hearing the employer concerned or any evi-dence (other than in relation to the matters aforesaid), make adetermination to the like effect as the decision.
(2) The bringing of a complaint before the Labour Court
under subparagraph (1) shall be effected by giving to the LabourCourt a written notice containing such particulars (if any) asmay be determined by the Labour Court.
(3) The Labour Court shall publish, in a manner it considers
appropriate, particulars of any determination made by it undersubparagraph (4)( a), (b), (c), (e) and ( f) of paragraph 2 (not
being a determination as respects a particular appeal under thatparagraph) and subparagraph (2).
Enforcement of determinations of Labour Court.
4. (1) If an employer fails to carry out in accordance with
its terms a determination of the Labour Court in relation to acomplaint under paragraph 1 within 6 weeks from the date onwhich the determination is communicated to the parties, the Cir-cuit Court shall, on application to it in that behalf by —
(a) the employee concerned, or
(b) with the consent of the employee, any trade union of
which the employee is a member,
without hearing the employer or any evidence (other than in
relation to the matters aforesaid), make an order directing theemployer to carry out the determination in accordance with itsterms.
(2) The reference in subparagraph (1) to a determination of
the Labour Court is a reference to a determination in relationto which, at the expiration of the time for bringing an appealagainst it, no such appeal has been brought or, if such an appealhas been brought it has been abandoned and the references tothe date on which the determination is communicated to theparties shall, in a case where such an appeal is abandoned, beconstrued as references to the date of such abandonment.
(3) In an order under this paragraph providing for the pay-
ment of compensation, the Circuit Court may, if in all the cir-cumstances it considers it appropriate to do so, direct theemployer concerned to pay to the employee concerned intereston the compensation at the rate referred to in section 22 of the
17S.11S.11
Construction of
references toSchedule toPrincipal Act.
Short title,
collective citation,construction andcommencement.
18[No. 38.] [2009.] Labour Services (Amendment) Act
2009 .
Courts Act 1981, in respect of the whole or any part of the
period beginning 6 weeks after the date on which the determi-nation of the Labour Court is communicated to the parties andending on the date of the order.
(4) An application under this paragraph shall be made to the
Circuit Court sitting in the Circuit in which is situated the placeof work (within the meaning of the Safety, Health and Welfareat Work Act 2005) at which the employee is normally employedby the employer. ”.
12.—The Schedule to the Principal Act shall become Schedule 1
to the Principal Act, and references in any enactment to that Sched-ule shall be construed accordingly.
13.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Labour Services
(Amendment) Act 2009.
(2) The Labour Services Acts 1987 and 1999 and this Act may be
cited together as the Labour Services Acts 1987 to 2009.
(3) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or provisions.