————————
Number 24of2007
————————
DEFENCE (AMENDMENT) ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary
Section
1. Short title, commencement, collective citation and con-
struction.
2. Definition.3. Saving and transitional provisions.
PART 2
Amendments and Repeals
Chapter 1
Miscellaneous Amendments to Principal Act
4. Principal Act: repeals and amendments.
5. References to judge advocate in certain Acts and
instruments.
6. Amendment of section 2 of Principal Act (interpretation
generally).
7. Amendment of section 26 of Principal Act (general regu-
lations in relation to Defence Forces).
8. Amendment of section 61 of Principal Act (transfer of men
of Permanent Defence Force enlisted under section 53from one service corps to another).
9. Amendment of section 114 of Principal Act (redress of
wrongs).
12[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Chapter 2
Miscellaneous Amendments to other Acts and Instruments
10. References to ignominy in certain Act and instruments.11. Miscellaneous amendments to other Acts.
PART 3
Amendments to Part V of Principal Act
Chapter 1
Liability to Military Law
12. Amendment of section 120 of Principal Act (liability to
military law in respect of status).
13. Amendment of section 121 of Principal Act (modification of
Part V in its application to civilians subject to militarylaw).
14. Amendment of section 123 of Principal Act (time limit for
trial of offences).
Chapter 2
Offences against Military Law
15. Amendment of section 135 of Principal Act (desertion).16. Amendment of section 142 of Principal Act (drunkenness).17. Amendment of section 150 of Principal Act (unauthorised
carriage on ships or aircraft).
18. Amendment of section 161 of Principal Act (offences in
relation to courts-martial, etc.).
19. Amendment of section 162 of Principal Act (false evidence).
Chapter 3
Investigation and Summary Disposal of Charges, Appeals to
Summary Court-martial and Remands for Court-martial
20. Insertion of new section: scheduled offences.
21. Amendments to Principal Act consequential on section 20 .
22. Amendment of section 177 of Principal Act (charges
against officers).
23. Insertion of new sections: notice, right to elect, summary dis-
posal and remand.
24. Amendment of section 178 of Principal Act (disposition of
charges against men by commanding officers).
25. Insertion of new sections: notice, right to elect, summary dis-
posal and remand.
26. Insertion of new sections: appeal to summary court-martial,
etc.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
27. Amendment of section 179 of Principal Act (disposition of
charges against privates and seamen by subordinateofficers).
28. Insertion of new sections: notice, right to elect and sum-
mary disposal.
29. Insertion of new sections: appeal to commanding officer, etc.30. Insertion of new section: suspension of operation of certain
punishments pending appeal.
31. Amendment of section 184 of Principal Act (regulations in
relation to investigation and summary disposition ofcharges).
Chapter 4
Courts-martial
32. Insertion of new Chapter: Court-Martial Administrator.
33. Insertion of new Chapter: Director of Military Prosecutions.34. Insertion of new Chapter: Military Judge.35. Amendment of section 185 of Principal Act (acquittal or con-
viction to bar subsequent trial by court-martial).
36. Amendment of section 186 of Principal Act (classes of
courts-martial).
37. Amendment of section 187 of Principal Act (convening of
courts-martial).
38. Insertion of new section: summary court-martial.39. Amendment of section 189 of Principal Act (constitution of
general courts-martial).
40. Amendment of section 190 of Principal Act (constitution of
limited courts-martial).
41. Amendment of section 191 of Principal Act (disqualifications
for membership of courts-martial).
42. Amendment of section 192 of Principal Act (jurisdiction of
courts-martial).
43. Amendment of section 193 of Principal Act (dissolution of
courts-martial).
44. Amendment of section 194 of Principal Act (admission to
courts-martial).
45. Amendment of section 195 of Principal Act (divers matters
of procedure).
46. Amendment of section 197 of Principal Act (challenges by
accused).
47. Insertion of new section: rulings and directions.
34[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
48. Amendment of section 198 of Principal Act (voting at
courts-martial).
49. Amendment of section 199 of Principal Act (swearing of
court).
50. Amendment of section 202 of Principal Act (mental disorder
at time of trial).
51. Amendment of section 203 of Principal Act (mental disorder
at time of commission of offence).
52. Insertion of new sections: appeals to Courts-Martial Appeal
Court.
53. Insertion of new section: effect of certain offences on persons
in respect of whom committed.
54. Amendment of section 206 of Principal Act (effective dates
of sentences by courts-martial).
55. Amendment of section 207 of Principal Act (summoning and
privilege of witnesses at courts-martial).
56. Amendment of section 208 of Principal Act (contempt of
court-martial).
Chapter 5
Punishments awardable by Courts-martial for Offences against
Military Law
57. Amendment of section 209 of Principal Act (punishments
which may be awarded to officers by courts-martial).
58. Amendment of section 210 of Principal Act (punishments
which may be awarded to men by courts-martial).
59. Amendment of section 211 of Principal Act (one sentence to
be awarded in respect of all offences).
60. Insertion of new section: restriction on sentence of imprison-
ment or detention on person who is not represented.
61. Insertion of new section: suspension of custodial sentences.62. Insertion of new section: review of certain sentences.
63. Amendment of section 213 of Principal Act (order by court-
martial for payment of compensation).
64. Insertion of new section: payment of fine.
Chapter 6
Action on Findings and Sentences of Courts-martial
65. Amendment of section 225 of Principal Act (restitution of
stolen property).
66. Amendment of section 226 of Principal Act (right to copy of
proceedings of court-martial).[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Chapter 7
Execution of Sentences
67. Amendment of section 229 of Principal Act (execution of
sentence of imprisonment or detention).
68. Amendment of section 231 of Principal Act (duty of gov-
ernor of prison to receive prisoners).
69. Amendment of section 233 of Principal Act (regulation of
military prisons and detention barracks).
Chapter 8
Rules of Procedure and Court-martial Rules
70. Amendment of section 240 of Principal Act (rules of
procedure).
71. Insertion of new sections: Courts-Martial Rules Committee,
etc.
SCHEDULE 1
Saving and Transitional Provisions
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments to Principal Act
SCHEDULE 3
References to Ignominy in certain Act and Instruments
SCHEDULE 4
Miscellaneous Amendments to other Acts
SCHEDULE 5
Scheduled Offences
SCHEDULE 6
Amendments Consequential on Section 20
SCHEDULE 7
Court-Martial Rules
————————
56[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Civil Liability Act 1961 1961, No. 41
Civil Service Regulation Act 1956 1956, No. 46Courts-Martial Appeals Act 1983 1983, No. 19Criminal Evidence Act 1992 1992, No. 12Criminal Justice Act 1990 1990, No. 16Criminal Justice (Safety of United Nations Workers) Act
2000 2000, No. 16
Criminal Justice (Terrorist Offences) Act 2005 2005, No. 2Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act 2001 2001, No. 50Criminal Justice (United Nations Convention against
Torture) Act 2000 2000, No. 11
Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2006 2006, No. 11Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act 1990 1990, No. 32Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 2006 2006, No. 15Criminal Procedure Act 1993 1993, No. 40Defence Act 1954 1954, No. 18Defence Acts 1954 to 2006Defence (Amendment) Act 1987 1987, No. 8Defence (Amendment) Act 2006 2006, No. 20Geneva Conventions Act 1962 1962, No. 11International Criminal Court Act 2006 2006, No. 30Interpretation Act 2005 2005, No. 23Mental Health Act 2001 2001, No. 25Ombudsman (Defence Forces) Act 2004 2004, No. 36Police (Property) Act 1897 60 & 61 Vic., c. 30Prisons Act 1970 1970, No. 11Prisons Act 1972 1972, No. 7Statutory Instruments Act 1947 1947, No. 44Superannuation Act 1887 50 & 51 Vic., c. 67————————
Number 24of2007
————————
DEFENCE (AMENDMENT) ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE SUMMARY DISPOSAL OF
CHARGES OF OFFENCES AGAINST MILITARY LAW;TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND JURIS-DICTION OF THE SUMMARY COURT-MARTIAL; TOPROVIDE FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF THE COURT-MARTIAL ADMINISTRATOR, THE DIRECTOR OFMILITARY PROSECUTIONS AND A MILITARY JUDGE;TO PROVIDE FOR THE CONSTITUTION OF COURTS-MARTIAL AND MEMBERSHIP OF A COURT-MARTIALBOARD; TO PROVIDE FOR MATTERS OF PROCEDUREBEFORE COURTS-MARTIAL, THE AWARD ANDEXECUTION OF PUNISHMENTS BY COURTS-MARTIALAND THE SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES; TO PROVIDEFOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COURTS-MAR-TIAL RULES COMMITTEE AND THE MAKING OFCOURT-MARTIAL RULES; AND FOR THOSE ANDOTHER PURPOSES TO AMEND AND EXTEND THEDEFENCE ACTS 1954 TO 2006, TO MAKE CONSEQUEN-TIAL AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ENACTMENTS ANDTO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[21st April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Defence (Amendment) Act
2007.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , this Act shall come into operation
on such day or days as the Minister may appoint by order or orderseither generally or with reference to any particular purpose or pro-vision and different days may be so appointed for different purposesor different provisions, including the application of sections 4(2) ,10
and 11to different enactments specified in Schedules 2, 3 and 4
respectively and to different provisions of those enactments.
7
Short title,
commencement,collective citationand construction.Pt.1S . 1
Definition.
Saving and
transitionalprovisions.
Principal Act:
repeals andamendments.
References to judge
advocate in certainActs andinstruments.
Amendment of
section 2 ofPrincipal Act(interpretationgenerally).
8[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(3) This Part and sections 6 to9,12,14to17,31to34and 65shall
come into operation on the passing of this Act.
(4) The Defence Acts 1954 to 2006 and this Act may be cited
together as the Defence Acts 1954 to 2007 and shall be read togetheras one.
2.—In this Act “Principal Act” means the Defence Act 1954.
3.—The saving and transitional provisions in Schedule 1 have
effect.
PART 2
Amendments and Repeals
Chapter 1
Miscellaneous Amendments to Principal Act
4.—(1) Sections 142A, 180, 188 and 215 to 224 of the Principal
Act are repealed.
(2) The Principal Act is amended as indicated in Schedule 2 .
5.—Every reference in the Defence Acts 1954 to 2007 or in any
instrument made under those Acts to a judge-advocate shall be readas a reference to a military judge.
6.—Section 2 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by inserting the following definitions:
“ ‘a day’s pay’ means—
(a) in relation to a person who is convicted by a
court-martial of an offence against military lawor in respect of whom a determination is madeor confirmed under Chapter IV of Part V ofthis Act and who is a member of the DefenceForces, the basic pay, excluding any additionalpay or allowance, that is, or would be, payableto that person in respect of the day on whichpunishment is awarded in respect of theoffence, or
(b) in relation to a person who is convicted by a
court-martial of an offence against military lawor in respect of whom a determination is madeor confirmed under Chapter IV of Part V ofthis Act and who is not a member of theDefence Forces but who was a member of theDefence Forces when the offence was commit-ted (not being a person to whom paragraph ( c)
of this definition applies), the basic pay,excluding any additional pay or allowance, thatwould be payable to that person in respect ofthe day on which punishment is awarded in[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
respect of the offence if he were a member of
the Defence Forces on that day and his rankand service (or service in rank, if appropriate)were the same as those on the last day of hisservice in the Defence Forces, or
(c) in relation to a person who is convicted by a
court-martial of an offence against military lawor in respect of whom a determination is madeor confirmed under Chapter IV of Part V ofthis Act and who is not a member of theDefence Forces but who is, or was when theoffence was committed, subject to military lawas an officer pursuant to section 118( d)o r( e)
or as a man pursuant to section 119( c)o r( d),
the basic pay, excluding any additional pay orallowance, that would be payable to an officerin the rank of second lieutenant who is inreceipt of the maximum pay applicable to thatrank, or to a man in the rank of private of thehighest grade who is in receipt of the maximumpay applicable to that rank, as the case may be,in respect of the day on which punishment isawarded in respect of the offence;
‘assisting person’ means in relation to proceedings for an
offence under Part V of this Act, subject to the consent ofthe member concerned, such member of the DefenceForces who is subject to military law as the person chargedwith the offence may choose for the purposes of providingassistance to that person as provided for in the said Part V;
‘court-martial’, when used without qualification, means a
general court-martial, a limited court-martial or a sum-mary court-martial;
‘Court-Martial Administrator’ means the Court-Martial
Administrator appointed under Chapter IVA of Part V ofthis Act;
‘court-martial rules’ means rules made under section 240B
with respect to courts-martial;
‘Director’ means the Director of Military Prosecutions
appointed under Chapter IVB of Part V of this Act;
‘document’ includes—
(a) a map, plan, graph, drawing, photograph or
record, or
(b) a reproduction in permanent legible form, by a
computer or other means (includingenlarging), of information in non-legible form;
‘intoxicant’ includes any alcohol, drug, solvent or any
other substance or combination of substances;
‘military judge’ means a military judge appointed under
Chapter IVC of Part V of this Act;
‘scheduled offence’, for the purposes of Part V of this Act,
shall have the meaning assigned to it by section 176A;”,
9Pt.2S . 6Pt.2S . 6
Amendment of
section 26 ofPrincipal Act(general regulationsin relation toDefence Forces).
10[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) in the definition of “prescribed”, in paragraph ( a), by sub-
stituting “(other than Chapters IV and X or in the caseof any matter or thing referred to in Part V as prescribedby court-martial rules)” for “(except Chapters IV andX)”,
(c) in the definition of “service” by inserting “or any other
matter” after “property”,
(d) by deleting the definition of “steal”,
(e) by substituting the following for the definition of “sup-
erior officer”:
“ ‘superior officer’ includes—
(a) when used in relation to a member of the Per-
manent Defence Force, an officer or non-com-missioned officer of the Permanent DefenceForce of equal or higher rank who is author-ised, in relation to that member, by or underthis Act or by custom of the service, to exerciseauthority over that member,
(b) when used in relation to a member of the
Reserve Defence Force, an officer or non-com-missioned officer of the Permanent DefenceForce or of the Reserve Defence Force, ofequal or higher rank, who is authorised, inrelation to that member, by or under this Actor by custom of the service, to exercise auth-ority over that member;”,
and
(f) by inserting the following after subsection (3):
“(4) In this Act, a reference to stealing shall be con-
strued as a reference to theft within the meaning of section2 of the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act2001.”.
7.—Section 26 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by renumbering the existing provision as subsection (1) of
that section, and
(b) by inserting the following subsection:
“(2) Regulations under this section may—
(a) contain such incidental, supplementary and con-
sequential provisions as appear to the Ministerto be necessary or expedient for the purposesof the regulations or for giving full effect tothis Act,
(b) apply either generally or by reference to a speci-
fied category or categories of persons.”.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
8.—Section 61 of the Principal Act is amended in subsection (1)
by substituting “who were enlisted under section 53 before the com-mencement of section 8 of the Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 ” for
“enlisted under section 53”.
9.—Section 114 of the Principal Act is amended by inserting the
following after subsection (4):
“(5) This section shall not apply to—
(a) any determination made, punishment awarded or
compensation order made under section 177C, 178Cor 179C, or
(b) the decision of a summary court-martial under section
178G following an appeal under section 178E.”.
Chapter 2
Miscellaneous Amendments to other Acts and Instruments
10.—(1) The Act specified in Part 1 ofSchedule 3 is amended as
indicated in that Schedule.
(2) The instruments specified in Part 2 ofSchedule 3 are amended
as indicated in that Schedule.
(3) Every reference in any Act or in any instrument made under
any Act (other than an Act or instrument to which subsection (1) or
(2)relates) to ignominy, as it applies to dismissal or discharge
(however expressed) from the Defence Forces, shall be read as areference to disgrace.
11.—The Acts specified in Schedule 4 are amended as indicated in
that Schedule.
PART 3
Amendments to Part V of Principal Act
Chapter 1
Liability to Military Law
12.—Section 120 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (2):
“(2) Where—
(a) an offence (other than that of mutiny, desertion,
fraudulent enlistment or a civil offence com-mitted by a person subject to military law whilehe was on active service outside the State orwhile he was despatched for service outside theState for any purpose specified in section 3 of
11Pt.2
Amendment of
section 61 ofPrincipal Act(transfer of men ofPermanent DefenceForce enlistedunder section 53from one servicecorps to another).
Amendment of
section 114 ofPrincipal Act(redress of wrongs).
References to
ignominy in certainAct andinstruments.
Miscellaneous
amendments toother Acts.
Amendment of
section 120 ofPrincipal Act(liability to militarylaw in respect ofstatus).Pt.3 S.12
Amendment of
section 121 ofPrincipal Act(modification ofPart V in itsapplication tocivilians subject tomilitary law).
12[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
the Defence (Amendment) Act 2006) against
military law triable by court-martial under thisAct has been committed by any person whilesubject to military law, and
(b) such person has since commission of the offence
ceased to be subject to military law,
that person may not be tried for the offence unless he is
charged with the offence in accordance with this Actwithin six months beginning on the date on which heceased to be so subject, but nothing in this subsection shallbe construed as affecting the jurisdiction of a civil courtwhere the offence is triable by that court as well as bycourt-martial.”,
and
(b) by substituting the following for subsection (3):
“(3) Where a person subject to military law is sen-
tenced by a court-martial to a term of imprisonment ordetention and is in service custody, this Act shall apply tothe person during the term of that sentence, notwithstand-ing that the person is discharged or dismissed from theDefence Forces or has otherwise ceased to be subject tomilitary law, and the person may be kept, removed,imprisoned, made to undergo detention and punishedaccordingly as if the person continued to be subject tomilitary law.”.
13.—The following section is substituted for section 121 of the
Principal Act:
“Modification
of Part V in itsapplication tocivilianssubject tomilitary law.121.—In the application of this Part to persons
who do not belong to the Defence Forces, the fol-lowing modifications shall be made:
(a) where an offence against military law
has been committed by any personsubject to military law who does notbelong to the Defence Forces and theperson is remanded for trial by court-martial under this Act, that personmay be tried by such class of court-martial as the Director directs and, onconviction, dealt with and punishedaccordingly;
(b) any person subject to military law who
does not belong to the Defence Forcesshall, for the purpose of this Part, bedeemed to be under the command ofthe prescribed officer, and that person,subject to the right to elect to be triedby court-martial pursuant to section177B or 178B, as appropriate, may,with the prior consent of the Director,be dealt with summarily and punishedunder Chapter IV of this Part, accord-ing to whether the person is subject tomilitary law as an officer or as a man.”.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
14.—Section 123 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) Subject to subsection (1A), a person subject to
military law shall not be charged with an offence (otherthan that of mutiny, desertion, fraudulent enlistment or acivil offence committed by a person subject to military lawwhile he was on active service outside the State or whilehe was despatched for service outside the State for anypurpose specified in section 3 of the Defence(Amendment) Act 2006) against military law triable bycourt-martial under this Act after the end of six yearsbeginning with the date of commission of the offence.”,
and
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) Proceedings for the summary disposal of a
scheduled offence under Chapter IV of this Part may becommenced—
(a) at any time within 12 months from the date on
which the offence was committed, or
(b) at any time within 12 months from the date on
which evidence sufficient, in the opinion of theperson by whom the proceedings are initiated,to justify the proceedings comes to that per-son’s knowledge,
whichever is the later, but no such proceedings shall be
commenced later than 3 years from the date on which theoffence concerned was committed.
(1B) In calculating a period referred to in subsection
(1) or (1A) of this section there shall not be included anyperiod during which the person is certified by his com-manding officer as being—
(a) on active service,
(b) despatched for service outside the State for any
purpose specified in section 3 of the Defence(Amendment) Act 2006,
(c) otherwise engaged in any other essential oper-
ational duties within or outside the State,
(d) absent without leave, or
(e) unavailable for investigation due to illness.”.
13Pt.3
Amendment of
section 123 ofPrincipal Act (timelimit for trial ofoffences).Pt.3
Amendment of
section 135 ofPrincipal Act(desertion).
Amendment of
section 142 ofPrincipal Act(drunkenness).
14[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Chapter 2
Offences against Military Law
15.—Section 135(2)( a) of the Principal Act is amended in subpara-
graph (i) by inserting “(which, for the purpose of this section,includes, but is not limited to, active service or service with a contin-gent or as a member despatched for service outside the State forany purpose specified in section 3 of the Defence (Amendment) Act2006)” after “important service”.
16.—The following section is substituted for section 142 of the
Principal Act:
“Prohibition
on being underthe influenceof anintoxicant.142.—(1) Every person subject to military law
who, whether on duty or not on duty, due to hisor her being under the influence of an intoxicant—
(a) is unfit to be entrusted with any duty
that the person is or may be requiredto perform, or
(b) behaves in a disorderly manner or in
any manner likely to bring discredit onthe Defence Forces,
is guilty of an offence against military law and
shall, where a charge under this section is disposedof summarily under section 177C, 178C or 179C,as the case may be, be liable to suffer any punish-ment awardable thereunder or, on conviction bycourt-martial, be liable to suffer—
(i) in the case of an officer, dismissal from
the Defence Forces or any less punish-ment awardable by a court-martial, or
(ii) in the case of a man, where the offence
is committed on active service or onduty, imprisonment for any term notexceeding two years or any less punish-ment awardable by a court-martial, or
(iii) in the case of a man, where the offence
is committed otherwise than on activeservice or on duty, detention for aperiod not exceeding ninety days orany less punishment awardable by acourt-martial.
(2) In any proceedings for an offence under this
section, evidence given by a person subject tomilitary law of his opinion that another such per-son was, at the material time, under the influenceof an intoxicant shall, without more, be evidence,until the contrary is proved, of intoxication.
(3) In any proceedings for an offence under this
section it shall be a defence for the person charged[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
with the offence to prove that the intoxicant con-
cerned was administered by, or taken in accord-ance with the directions of, a registered medicalpractitioner or a registered dentist (or both soadministered and taken).”.
17.—The following section is substituted for section 150 of the
Principal Act:
“Unauthorised
carriage onships oraircraft.150.—Every person subject to military law who
knowingly consigns, takes or receives on board, orallows to be carried on board, a State ship orservice aircraft, or a ship or aircraft used for anypurpose by the Defence Forces, persons, goods ormerchandise that the person is not authorised toconsign, take or receive on board is guilty of anoffence against military law and shall, where acharge under this section is disposed of summarilyunder section 177C or 178C, as the case may be,be liable to suffer any punishment awardablethereunder or, on conviction by court-martial, beliable to suffer imprisonment for any term notexceeding two years or any less punishmentawardable by a court-martial.”.
18.—Section 161 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by substituting the following for para-
graphs ( b) and ( c):
“(b) an officer, pursuant to section 177, investigating
a charge of an offence for which a personwould be required on conviction to be sen-tenced to imprisonment for life,
(c) a commanding officer, pursuant to section 178,
investigating a charge of an offence for whicha person would be required on conviction tobe sentenced to imprisonment for life,”,
(b) in subsection (2)—
(i) by inserting the following after paragraph ( e):
“(ea) who communicates with the Director, a
member of his staff (including a prosecut-ing officer), a member of a court-martialboard, a military judge or a witness in anyproceedings under this Act for the pur-pose of influencing, directly or indirectly,any decision relating to the performanceof their functions, including, as appro-priate, a decision to withdraw or not toinstitute such proceedings or any part-icular charge in such proceedings or theconduct or trial of any such proceedings,or
(eb) who fails, refuses or neglects to comply with
a direction of the military judge undersection 195, or
15Pt.3 S.16
Amendment of
section 150 ofPrincipal Act(unauthorisedcarriage on ships oraircraft).
Amendment of
section 161 ofPrincipal Act(offences in relationto courts-martial,etc.).Pt.3 S.18
16[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(ec) who, by act or omission, obstructs or hin-
ders a service tribunal in the performanceof its functions, or”,
and
(ii) by substituting the following for paragraph ( f):
“(f) who does or omits to do any other thing,
which, if the service tribunal were a civilcourt having power to commit for con-tempt, would be contempt of that court,”,
and
(c) by inserting the following after subsection (2):
“(3) If the Director, a member of his staff (including a
prosecuting officer), a member of a court-martial board, amilitary judge or a witness in any proceedings under thisAct is of the opinion that a communication is in breach ofsubsection (2)( ea) of this section, it shall be the duty of
that person not to entertain the communication further.
(4) ( a) In the case of the Director or a member of his
staff, subsection (2)( ea) of this section does not
apply to—
(i) communications made by a person who is a
complainant in proceedings for, or hasbeen charged with, an offence under thisAct or believes that he is likely to becharged with an offence under this Act, or
(ii) communications made by a person involved
in the matter either personally or as legalor medical adviser to a person involved inthe matter or as a social worker or amember of the family of a person involvedin the matter.
(b) In this subsection ‘member of the family’ means
spouse, parent, grandparent, step-parent, child(including a step-child or an adopted child),grandchild, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew of the per-son concerned;
‘spouse’ means each person of a couple in
relation to the other;
‘couple’ means a married couple or a man and
woman who are not married to each other butare cohabiting as husband and wife.
(5) Subsection (2) of this section shall apply in relation
to the summary disposal of charges under section 177C,178C or 179C, as the case may be, as it applies to a servicetribunal and for the purposes of such application refer-ences in the said subsection (2) to a service tribunal shallbe construed as references to the summary disposal ofcharges under section 177C, 178C or 179C, as the casemay be.”.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
19.—The following section is substituted for section 162 of the
Principal Act:
“False
evidence.162.—Every person subject to military law who,
when examined on oath or solemn declarationbefore—
(a) a service tribunal within the meaning of
section 161,
(b) an authorised officer investigating a
charge under section 177C,
(c) a commanding officer investigating a
charge under section 178C, or
(d) a subordinate officer investigating a
charge under section 179C,
knowingly gives false evidence is guilty of an
offence against military law and shall, on convic-tion by court-martial, be liable to suffer imprison-ment for any term not exceeding two years or anyless punishment awardable by a court-martial.”.
Chapter 3
Investigation and Summary Disposal of Charges, Appeals to
Summary Court-martial and Remands for Court-martial
20.—(1) The following section is inserted after section 176 of the
Principal Act:
“Scheduled
offences.176A.—An offence of a disciplinary nature
under any of the provisions of this Act specifiedin the Eleventh Schedule to this Act shall be ascheduled offence for the purposes of this Part ofthis Act.”.
(2) The Schedule set out in Schedule 5 is inserted after the Tenth
Schedule to the Principal Act.
21.—The Principal Act is amended as indicated in Schedule 6 .
22.—The following section is substituted for section 177 of the
Principal Act:
“Charges
against officersand otherspecifiedpersons.177.—(1) A charge against a person subject to
military law—
(a) as an officer, or
(b) as a non-commissioned officer in the
rank of sergeant major or battalionquarter-master sergeant or their equiv-alent naval ranks,
17Pt.3
Amendment of
section 162 ofPrincipal Act (falseevidence).
Insertion of new
section: scheduledoffences.
Amendments to
Principal Actconsequential onsection 20 .
Amendment of
section 177 ofPrincipal Act(charges againstofficers).Pt.3 S.22
18[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
shall, subject to the giving of a notice under
section 177A, in accordance with regulations madeunder section 184, be investigated by the person’scommanding officer or, if the Deputy Chief ofStaff (Support) so directs, by such officer as theDeputy Chief of Staff (Support) may appoint forthe purpose.
(2) ( a) Where a person is charged with a sched-
uled offence, the officer investigatingthe charge under subsection (1) of thissection shall—
(i) where the person charged holds the
rank of lieutenant colonel or com-mander or any higher com-missioned rank—
(I) subject to paragraph ( b) of this
subsection, dismiss the chargeif, in his discretion, he con-siders that it should not beproceeded with, or
(II) remand the person charged for
trial by court-martial if heconsiders that the chargeshould be proceeded with,
(ii) in any other case—
(I) subject to paragraph ( b) of this
subsection, dismiss the chargeif, in his discretion, he con-siders that it should not beproceeded with, or
(II) remand the person charged for
trial by court-martial if heconsiders that the chargeshould be proceeded with, or
(III) subject to this section and to
regulations made undersection 184, refer the chargefor summary investigation byan authorised officer.
(b) In the case of a charge against a person
for a scheduled offence specified inPart II of the Eleventh Schedule to thisAct, dismissal of the charge under sub-paragraph (i)(I) or (ii)(I) of paragraph(a) of this subsection or referral of the
charge for summary investigation byan authorised officer under subpara-graph (ii)(III) of the said paragraph ( a)
shall be subject to the prior consent ofthe Director and where the Directorrefuses consent in any such case theperson charged shall be remanded fortrial by court-martial.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(3) ( a) Where a person is charged with an
offence other than a scheduledoffence, the officer investigating thecharge under subsection (1) of thissection shall—
(i) subject to the prior consent of the
Director, dismiss the charge if the
officer considers that it should notbe proceeded with, or
(ii) remand the person for trial by
court-martial.
(b) Where the Director refuses consent to
the dismissal of the charge concerned,the person charged shall be remandedfor trial by court-martial.
(4) Where a person is remanded under this
section for trial by court-martial, the matter shallbe referred to the Director for his directions.
(5) Where a person is charged with an offence
for which the person would be required on convic-tion to be sentenced to imprisonment for life andthe charge is investigated under this section, theperson may, if he so wishes, be represented bycounsel (within the meaning of section 196) or byan officer subject to military law.”.
23.—The following sections are inserted after section 177 of the
Principal Act:
“Notice. 177A.—Where a charge against a person subject
to military law is—
(a) to be investigated under section 177 by
the person’s commanding officer or anofficer appointed for that purpose bythe Deputy Chief of Staff (Support), or
(b) referred to an authorised officer for
summary investigation under section177(2)( a)(ii)(III),
the person charged shall be entitled to receive, in
the prescribed manner, at least 24 hours before thecharge is to be so investigated—
(i) written notice in the prescribed form of
the date on which and the time andplace at which the charge is to be soinvestigated, and
(ii) a copy of the charge sheet containing
particulars of the offence concerned, alist of the witnesses who will be givingevidence against the person and, whereavailable, an abstract of the evidence
19Pt.3 S.22
Insertion of new
sections: notice,right to elect,summary disposaland remand.Pt.3 S.23
20[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
to be given against the person and a
copy of any witness statements.
Right to elect
for trial bycourt-martial.177B.—(1) Before disposing of a charge sum-
marily under section 177C, the authorised officershall, in the prescribed manner—
(a) ask the person charged whether he
elects to have the charge disposed ofsummarily by the authorised officer orto be tried by court-martial, and
(b) inform the person charged that he may
obtain legal advice regarding thematter of the election and, where theperson wishes to obtain such legaladvice, that the hearing shall beadjourned for such period as the auth-orised officer considers reasonable(which period shall not in any case beless than 48 hours).
(2) Where the person charged elects to be tried
by court-martial, whether or not the personobtains legal advice, the authorised officer shallremand the person charged for trial by court-mar-tial and shall refer the charge to the Director forhis directions but otherwise shall proceed to dis-pose of the charge summarily under section 177Cand may do so then and there.
(3) Where two or more charges are brought
against the person concerned, an election for trialby court-martial in respect of any of the chargesshall take effect as an election in respect of all ofthem.
Summary
disposal byauthorisedofficer.177C.—(1) This section applies where the per-
son charged elects under section 177B to have thecharge disposed of summarily by the authorisedofficer.
(2) The authorised officer may, subject to sub-
section (5) of this section, dismiss the charge atany stage of the hearing.
(3) If the authorised officer determines that the
charge has not been proved he shall dismiss thecharge.
(4) The authorised officer may, after hearing
the evidence or without hearing the evidence,remand the person charged for trial by court-mar-tial and, in that case, shall refer the matter to theDirector for his directions.
(5) After hearing the evidence or, if the person
charged consents to the attendance of witnessesbeing dispensed with and admits the offencecharged, after reading a summary or abstract ofthe evidence, where the authorised officer makesa determination that the charge has been proved,he shall—[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) record the determination, and
(b) subject to subsection (6) of this
section—
(i) in the case of a person subject to
military law as an officer pursuantto section 118( a), (b)o r( c)o ra s
a non-commissioned officer in therank of sergeant major or bat-talion quarter-master sergeant ortheir equivalent naval ranks,award one of the following pun-ishments:
(I) reduction on the applicable
scale of pay of the person byone increment from a speci-fied date for a specifiedperiod not exceeding oneyear;
(II) deferral for a specified period
not exceeding one year of thenext increment due to theperson on the applicable scaleof pay of that person;
(III) a fine not exceeding an
amount equal to seven days’pay of the person at the mostrecent applicable rate;
(IV) severe reprimand;
(V) reprimand,
(ii) in the case of a person subject to
military law as an officer pursuantto section 118( d)o r( e), award one
of the following punishments:
(I) a fine not exceeding an
amount equal to seven days’pay of the person at the mostrecent applicable rate;
(II) severe reprimand;
(III) reprimand.
(6) Where the authorised officer records a
determination that two or more charges againstthe person have been proved, he shall award a sin-gle punishment in accordance with subsection (5)of this section in respect of the charges takentogether.
(7) The person charged may have an assisting
person present at but not participating in the hear-ing before the authorised officer.
21Pt.3 S.23Pt.3 S.23
22[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(8) The evidence against the person charged
taken before the authorised officer shall, if the
person charged so demands, be taken on oath, andin that event there shall be administered to eachwitness the same oath or solemn declaration asthat required to be taken by a witness before acourt-martial, and for this purpose the authorisedofficer may administer oaths or solemn dec-larations.
(9) Where the authorised officer makes a deter-
mination under this section that a charge has beenproved and the offence charged occasioned anypersonal injury, expense or loss or destruction of,or damage to, any property, the authorised officermay, instead of or in addition to any punishmentwhich he is authorised by this section to award inrespect of the offence, order that there shall bepaid by the person charged, as compensation forthe personal injury, expense, loss, damage ordestruction so occasioned, to any person who hassuffered such personal injury, expense, loss,damage or destruction, such sum as the authorisedofficer may direct not exceeding the lesser of—
(a) the amount required to make good such
personal injury, expense, loss, damageor destruction, or
(b) subject to subsection (10) of this section,
an amount equal to twenty-eight days’pay of the person charged.
(10) A compensation order under subsection
(9) of this section may provide for payment of thecompensation by such instalments and at suchtimes as the authorised officer shall in all the cir-cumstances consider reasonable subject to amaximum deduction of seven days’ pay in any onecalendar month.
Remand for
trial by court-martial.177D.—(1) Where the person charged is
remanded for trial by court-martial under section177(2)( a)(ii)(II) or 177C and the matter is referred
to the Director for his directions, the Director maydirect that the charge (with such alterations,amendments, additions, substitutions andadditional charges as he thinks fit) be referredback to an authorised officer and the authorisedofficer shall either dismiss or, subject to the rightto elect to be tried by court-martial pursuant tosection 177B, dispose of the charge or charges soreferred back summarily in accordance withsection 177C.
(2) Where the person charged—
(a) is remanded for trial by court-martial
under section 177(2)( a)(ii)(II) or 177C
and no direction is given under subsec-tion (1) of this section, or[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) is remanded for trial by court-martial
under section 177 (other than undersection 177(2)( a)(ii)(II)) or 177B,
the Director may—
(i) subject to section 192, in respect of the
charge concerned (with such alter-ations, amendments, additions, substi-tutions and additional charges as hethinks fit)—
(I) direct that the matter be referred
for trial by summary court-mar-tial, or
(II) direct that the Court-Martial
Administrator convene a generalcourt-martial or limited court-martial, as specified in his direc-tion, to try the person charged,
or
(ii) withdraw the charge.”.
24.—The following section is substituted for section 178 of the
Principal Act:
“Charges
against men.178.—(1) This section and sections 178A to
178D apply to the summary disposal by a com-manding officer of a charge against a person sub-ject to military law as a man other than a sergeantmajor or battalion quarter-master sergeant or theirequivalent naval ranks.
(2) ( a) Where a person referred to in subsec-
tion (1) of this section is charged witha scheduled offence, the commandingofficer investigating the charge(including a charge referred to thecommanding officer under section179(2)( b) or 179B) shall—
(i) subject to paragraph ( b) of this sub-
section, dismiss the charge if, inhis discretion, he considers that itshould not be proceeded with, or
(ii) remand the person for trial by
court-martial if he considers thatthe charge should be proceededwith, or
(iii) subject to this section and to regu-
lations made under section 184,deal with the charge summarily.
(b) In the case of a charge against a person
referred to in subsection (1) of thissection for a scheduled offence speci-fied in Part II of the Eleventh Schedule
23Pt.3 S.23
Amendment of
section 178 ofPrincipal Act(disposition ofcharges against menby commandingofficers).Pt.3 S.24
Insertion of new
sections: notice,right to elect,summary disposaland remand.
24[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
to this Act, dismissal of the charge
under subparagraph (i) of paragraph(a) of this subsection or the decision to
dispose of the charge summarily undersubparagraph (iii) of the said para-graph ( a) shall be subject to the prior
consent of the Director and where theDirector refuses consent in any suchcase the person shall be remanded fortrial by court-martial.
(3) ( a) Where a person is charged with an
offence other than a scheduledoffence, the commanding officerinvestigating the charge shall—
(i) subject to the prior consent of the
Director, dismiss the charge if heconsiders that it should not beproceeded with, or
(ii) remand the person for trial by
court-martial.
(b) Where the Director refuses consent to
the dismissal of the charge concerned,the person charged shall be remandedfor trial by court-martial.
(4) Where a person is remanded under this
section for trial by court-martial, the matter shallbe referred to the Director for his directions.
(5) Where a person referred to in subsection
(1) of this section is charged with an offence forwhich the person would be required on convictionto be sentenced to imprisonment for life and thecharge is investigated under this section, the per-son may, if he so wishes, be represented by counsel(within the meaning of section 196) or by anofficer subject to military law.”.
25.—The following sections are inserted after section 178 of the
Principal Act:
“Notice. 178A.—Where a charge against a person
referred to in section 178(1) is to be investigatedby a commanding officer, the person charged shallbe entitled to receive, in the prescribed manner, atleast 24 hours before the charge is to be soinvestigated—
(a) written notice in the prescribed form of
the date on which and the time andplace at which the charge is to be soinvestigated, and
(b) a copy of the charge sheet containing
particulars of the offence concerned, alist of the witnesses who will be givingevidence against the person and copiesof any available evidence to be given[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
against the person and of any witness
statements.
Right to elect
for trial bycourt-martial.178B.—(1) Before disposing of a charge sum-
marily under section 178C, the commandingofficer shall, in the prescribed manner—
(a) ask the person charged whether he
elects to have the charge disposed ofsummarily by the commanding officeror to be tried by court-martial, and
(b) inform the person charged that he may
obtain legal advice regarding thematter of the election and, where theperson wishes to obtain such legaladvice, that the hearing shall beadjourned for such period as the com-manding officer considers reasonable(which period shall not in any case beless than 48 hours).
(2) Where the person charged elects to be tried
by court-martial, whether or not the personobtains legal advice, the commanding officer shallremand the person for trial by court-martial andshall refer the charge to the Director for his direc-tions but otherwise shall proceed to dispose of thecharge summarily under section 178C and may doso then and there.
(3) Where two or more charges are brought
against the person concerned, an election for trialby court-martial in respect of any of the chargesshall take effect as an election in respect of all ofthem.
Summary
disposal bycommandingofficer.178C.—(1) This section applies where the per-
son charged elects under section 178B to have thecharge disposed of summarily by the commandingofficer and, in the case of a scheduled offencespecified in Part II of the Eleventh Schedule tothis Act, the Director has consented to the chargebeing disposed of summarily.
(2) The commanding officer may, subject to
subsection (5) of this section, dismiss the charge atany stage of the hearing.
(3) If the commanding officer determines that
the charge has not been proved he shall dismissthe charge.
(4) The commanding officer may, after hearing
the evidence or without hearing the evidence,remand the person charged for trial by court-mar-tial and, in that case, shall refer the matter to theDirector for his directions.
(5) After hearing the evidence or, if the person
charged consents to the attendance of witnessesbeing dispensed with and admits the offencecharged, having considered the available evidence,
25Pt.3 S.25Pt.3 S.25
26[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
where the commanding officer makes a determi-
nation that the charge has been proved, he shall—
(a) record the determination, and
(b) subject to subsection (7) of this
section—
(i) in the case of a non-commissioned
officer, award one of the follow-ing punishments:
(I) reduction on the applicable
scale of pay of the person byone increment from a speci-fied date for a specifiedperiod not exceeding oneyear;
(II) deferral for a specified period
not exceeding one year of thenext increment due to theperson on the applicable scaleof pay of that person;
(III) a fine not exceeding an
amount equal to seven days’pay of the person at the mostrecent applicable rate;
(IV) severe reprimand;
(V) reprimand,
(ii) in the case of a private or a seaman,
award one or, subject to subsec-tion (6) of this section, a combi-nation of the following pun-ishments:
(I) reduction on the applicable
scale of pay of the person byone increment from a speci-fied date for a specifiedperiod not exceeding oneyear;
(II) deferral for a specified period
not exceeding one year of thenext increment due to theperson on the applicable scaleof pay of the person;
(III) a fine not exceeding an
amount equal to seven days’pay of the person at the mostrecent applicable rate;
(IV) stoppage of local leave or
shore leave, as the case maybe, for a period or periods notexceeding a total of fourteen[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
days, as may be prescribed
under section 184;
(V) additional duties as may be
prescribed under section 184;
(VI) a warning,
(iii) in the case of a person subject to
military law as a man pursuant tosection 119( c)o r( d), award one of
the following punishments:
(I) a fine not exceeding an
amount equal to seven days’pay of the person at the mostrecent applicable rate;
(II) a warning.
(6) Where the person charged is a private or
seaman, save as provided for by subsection (10)of this section, only the following combinations ofpunishments may be awarded by a commandingofficer:
(a) in the case where the commanding
officer awards a fine under subpara-graph (ii)(III) of paragraph ( b) of sub-
section (5) of this section, he may alsoaward—
(i) stoppage of local leave or shore
leave under subparagraph (ii)(IV)of the said paragraph ( b), or
(ii) additional duties under subpara-
graph (ii)(V) of the said para-graph ( b);
or
(b) in the case where the commanding
officer awards stoppage of local leaveor shore leave under subparagraph(ii)(IV) of paragraph ( b) of subsection
(5) of this section, he may also awardadditional duties under subparagraph(ii)(V) of the said paragraph ( b).
(7) Where the commanding officer records a
determination that two or more charges againstthe person have been proved, he shall award a sin-gle punishment or combination of punishments inaccordance with subsections (5) and (6) of thissection in respect of the charges taken together.
(8) The person charged may have an assisting
person present at but not participating in the hear-ing before the commanding officer.
(9) The evidence against the person charged
taken before the commanding officer shall, if the
27Pt.3 S.25Pt.3 S.25
28[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
person so demands, be taken on oath, and in that
event there shall be administered to each witness
the same oath or solemn declaration as thatrequired to be taken by a witness before a court-martial, and for this purpose the commandingofficer may administer oaths or solemn dec-larations.
(10) Where the commanding officer makes a
determination under this section that a charge hasbeen proved and the offence charged occasionedany personal injury, expense, or loss or destructionof, or damage to, any property, the commandingofficer may, instead of or in addition to any pun-ishment which he is authorised by this section toaward in respect of the offence, order that thereshall be paid by the person charged, as compen-sation for the personal injury, expense, loss,damage or destruction so occasioned, to any per-son who has suffered such personal injury,expense, loss, damage or destruction, such sum asthe commanding officer may direct not exceedingthe lesser of—
(a) the amount required to make good such
personal injury, expense, loss, damageor destruction, or
(b) subject to subsection (11) of this section,
an amount equal to twenty-eight days’pay of the person charged.
(11) A compensation order under subsection
(10) of this section may provide for payment ofthe compensation by such instalments and at suchtimes as the commanding officer shall in all thecircumstances consider reasonable subject to amaximum deduction of seven days’ pay in any onecalendar month.
Remand for
trial by court-martial.178D.—(1) Where the person charged is
remanded for trial by court-martial under section178(2)( a)(ii) or 178C and the matter is referred to
the Director for his directions, the Director maydirect that the charge (with such alterations,amendments, additions, substitutions andadditional charges as he thinks fit) be referredback to the commanding officer and the com-manding officer shall either dismiss or, subject tothe right to elect to be tried by court-martial pur-suant to section 178B, dispose of the charge orcharges so referred back summarily in accordancewith section 178C.
(2) Where the person charged—
(a) is remanded for trial by court-martial
under section 178(2)( a)(ii) or 178C and
no direction is given under subsection(1) of this section, or[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) is remanded for trial by court-martial
under section 178 (other than undersection 178(2)( a)(ii)) or 178B,
the Director may—
(i) subject to section 192, in respect of the
charge concerned (with such alter-ations, amendments, additions, substi-tutions and additional charges as hethinks fit)—
(I) direct that the matter be referred
for trial by summary court-mar-tial, or
(II) direct that the Court-Martial
Administrator convene a generalcourt-martial or limited court-martial, as specified in his direc-tion, to try the person charged,
or
(ii) withdraw the charge.”.
26.—The following sections are inserted after section 178D
(inserted by section 25 ) of the Principal Act:
“Appeal to
summarycourt-martial.178E.—(1) This section and sections 178F and
178G shall apply in relation to a compensationorder made under section 177C or 178C as theyapply to a punishment awarded under the saidsection 177C or 178C, as the case may be, and forthe purpose of such application references in thissection and sections 178F and 178G to a punish-ment shall be construed as references to a com-pensation order.
(2) A person in respect of whom, under section
177C or 178C—
(a) a charge has been disposed of summar-
ily, and
(b) a determination made and punishment
awarded by an authorised officer orcommanding officer, as the case maybe,
may appeal in the manner prescribed by court-
martial rules to the summary court-martial againstthe determination or the punishment or both thedetermination and the punishment.
(3) An appeal under this section shall be
brought—
(a) within seven days beginning with the
date on which the punishment wasawarded (‘the initial period’), or
29Pt.3 S.25
Insertion of new
sections: appeal tosummary court-martial, etc.Pt.3 S.26
30[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) within such longer period as the sum-
mary court-martial may allow by leavegiven before the end of the initialperiod.
(4) The respondent to an appeal under this
section shall be the Director.
Hearing of
appeal bysummarycourt-martial.178F.—(1) An appeal under section 178E
against a determination shall be by way of—
(a) a rehearing of the charge, and
(b) except where section 178G(2) applies, a
rehearing as regards punishment.
(2) An appeal under section 178E against pun-
ishment shall be by way of a rehearing as regardspunishment.
(3) The appellant may, if he so wishes, be rep-
resented at the hearing of the appeal by counsel(within the meaning of section 196) or by anofficer subject to military law.
Powers of
summarycourt-martial.178G.—(1) At a rehearing of the charge con-
cerned under section 178F, the summary court-martial may confirm or quash the determinationconcerned.
(2) Where the summary court-martial quashes
a determination, or where there is more than onedetermination, every determination, made inrespect of the appellant, the summary court-mar-tial shall quash the punishment which relates tothat determination or, as the case may be, thosedeterminations.
(3) At a rehearing as regards punishment under
section 178F, the summary court-martial may—
(a) confirm the punishment awarded,
(b) quash that punishment, or
(c) substitute any other punishment which
it would have been within the powersof the authorised officer or command-ing officer, as the case may be, whoheard the charge against the appellantsummarily, to award.
(4) Where the summary court-martial substi-
tutes a punishment under subsection (3)( c) of this
section, the substituted punishment shall takeeffect on and from the date on which the originalpunishment was awarded or such other date as themilitary judge may order.
(5) Where an appeal is made to the summary
court-martial under section 178E, the militaryjudge—[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) shall, if requested by the appellant or
the respondent, unless the militaryjudge considers the request frivolous,and
(b) may, without request,
refer any question of law arising in that appeal to
the Courts-Martial Appeal Court for determi-nation in accordance with the Courts-MartialAppeals Act 1983.”.
27.—The following section is substituted for section 179 of the
Principal Act:
“Charges
againstprivates andseamen.179.—(1) A commanding officer may, in
accordance with regulations made under section184, delegate to any officer under his commandthe power of disposing of charges against privatesor seamen under the command of the command-ing officer in respect of any of the scheduledoffences specified in Part I of the Eleventh Sched-ule to this Act and every officer to whom suchpower is delegated shall, for the purposes of thissection, be a subordinate officer.
(2) A subordinate officer investigating a charge
against a private or seaman, who is subject tomilitary law, of having committed any of theoffences referred to in subsection (1) of thissection shall—
(a) dismiss the charge if, in his discretion,
he considers that it should not be pro-ceeded with, or
(b) where the subordinate officer considers
that the charge should be proceededwith, refer the charge to the command-ing officer who shall deal with thecharge in accordance with sections 178to 178D, or
(c) subject to this section and in accordance
with regulations made under section184, deal with the charge summarily.”.
28.—The following sections are inserted after section 179 of the
Principal Act:
“Notice. 179A.—Where a subordinate officer proposes
to investigate a charge against a private or seamanin respect of any of the offences referred to insection 179(1), the private or seaman shall beentitled to receive, in the prescribed manner, atleast 24 hours before the charge is to be soinvestigated—
(a) written notice in the prescribed form of
the date on which and the time and
31Pt.3 S.26
Amendment of
section 179 ofPrincipal Act(disposition ofcharges againstprivates and seamenby subordinateofficers).
Insertion of new
sections: notice,right to elect andsummary disposal.Pt.3 S.28
32[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
place at which the charge is to be so
investigated, and
(b) a copy of the charge sheet containing
particulars of the offence concerned, alist of the witnesses who will be givingevidence against the person and copiesof any available evidence to be givenagainst the person and of any witnessstatements.
Right to elect
to have chargedisposed ofsummarily bycommandingofficer.179B.—(1) Before disposing of a charge sum-
marily under section 179C, the subordinate officershall, in the prescribed manner, ask the private orseaman whether he elects to have the charge dis-posed of summarily by the subordinate officer orto have the charge referred to the commandingofficer and, if the private or seaman elects to havethe charge so referred, the subordinate officershall refer the charge to the commanding officerwho shall deal with the charge in accordance withsections 178 to 178D but otherwise the subordi-nate officer shall proceed to dispose of the chargesummarily under section 179C and may do so thenand there.
(2) Where two or more charges are brought
against a private or seaman, an election to haveany of the charges dealt with summarily by thecommanding officer shall take effect as an electionin respect of all of them.
Summary
disposal bysubordinateofficer.179C.—(1) This section applies where a private
or seaman elects under section 179B to have thecharge disposed of summarily by the subordinateofficer.
(2) The subordinate officer may, subject to sub-
section (5) of this section, dismiss the charge atany stage of the hearing.
(3) If the subordinate officer determines that
the charge has not been proved he shall dismissthe charge.
(4) The subordinate officer may, after hearing
the evidence or without hearing the evidence,refer the charge to the commanding officer whoshall deal with the charge in accordance withsections 178 to 178D.
(5) After hearing the evidence or, if the private
or seaman consents to the attendance of witnessesbeing dispensed with and admits the offencecharged, having considered the available evidence,where the subordinate officer makes a determi-nation that the charge has been proved, he shall—
(a) record the determination, and
(b) subject to subsections (6) and (7) of this
section, award one or a combination ofthe following punishments:[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(i) a fine not exceeding an amount
equal to three days’ pay of theprivate or seaman at the mostrecent applicable rate;
(ii) stoppage of local leave or shore
leave, as the case may be, for aperiod or periods not exceeding atotal of seven days, as may be pre-scribed under section 184;
(iii) additional duties as may be pre-
scribed under section 184;
(iv) a warning.
(6) Save as provided for by subsection (10) of
this section, only the following combinations ofpunishments may be awarded by a subordinateofficer:
(a) in the case where the subordinate
officer awards a fine under subpara-graph (i) of paragraph ( b) of subsec-
tion (5) of this section, he may alsoaward—
(i) stoppage of local leave or shore
leave under subparagraph (ii) ofthe said paragraph ( b), or
(ii) additional duties under subpara-
graph (iii) of the said paragraph(b);
or
(b) in the case where the subordinate
officer awards stoppage of local leaveor shore leave under subparagraph (ii)of paragraph ( b) of subsection (5) of
this section, he may also awardadditional duties under subparagraph(iii) of the said paragraph ( b).
(7) Where the subordinate officer records a
determination that two or more charges againstthe private or seaman have been proved, he shallaward a single punishment or combination of pun-ishments in accordance with subsections (5) and(6) of this section in respect of the charges takentogether.
(8) The private or seaman may have an assist-
ing person present at but not participating in thehearing before the subordinate officer.
(9) The evidence against the private or seaman
taken before the subordinate officer shall, if theprivate or seaman so demands, be taken on oath,and in that event there shall be administered toeach witness the same oath or solemn declarationas that required to be taken by a witness before a
33Pt.3 S.28Pt.3 S.28
Insertion of new
sections: appeal tocommandingofficer, etc.
34[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
court-martial, and for this purpose the subordinate
officer may administer oaths and solemn dec-larations.
(10) Where the subordinate officer makes a
determination under this section that a charge hasbeen proved and the offence charged occasionedany personal injury, expense or loss or destructionof, or damage to, any property, the subordinateofficer may, instead of or in addition to any pun-ishment which he is authorised by this section toaward in respect of the offence, order that thereshall be paid by the private or seaman, as compen-sation for the personal injury, expense, loss,damage or destruction so occasioned, to any per-son who has suffered such personal injury,expense, loss, damage or destruction, such sum asthe subordinate officer may direct not exceedingthe lesser of—
(a) the amount required to make good such
personal injury, expense, loss, damageor destruction, or
(b) an amount equal to seven days’ pay of
the private or seaman.
(11) A compensation order under subsection
(10) of this section may provide for payment ofthe compensation by such instalments and at suchtimes as the subordinate officer shall in all the cir-cumstances consider reasonable.”.
29.—The following sections are inserted after section 179C
(inserted by section 28 ) of the Principal Act:
“Appeal to
commandingofficer.179D.—(1) This section and section 179E shall
apply in relation to a compensation order madeunder section 179C as they apply to a punishmentawarded under the said section 179C, and for thepurpose of such application references in thissection and section 179E to a punishment shall beconstrued as references to a compensation order.
(2) A private or seaman in respect of whom,
under section 179C—
(a) a charge has been disposed of summar-
ily, and
(b) a determination made and punishment
awarded by a subordinate officer,
may appeal in the prescribed manner to a com-
manding officer against the determination or thepunishment awarded (or both).
(3) An appeal under this section shall be
brought—[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) within two days beginning on the date
on which the punishment was awarded(‘the initial period’), or
(b) within such longer period as the com-
manding officer of the private or sea-man concerned may allow, by leavegiven before the end of the initialperiod, which longer period shall notexceed five days beginning on the dateon which the punishment was awarded.
Hearing of
appeals bycommandingofficer.179E.—(1) An appeal under section 179D
against a determination shall be by way of arehearing of the charge and a rehearing asregards punishment.
(2) An appeal under section 179D against pun-
ishment shall be by way of a rehearing as regardspunishment.
(3) The appellant is entitled to have an assisting
person present at but not participating in the hear-ing of the appeal.
(4) Subsections (2) to (11) of section 178C and
section 178D shall apply, with any necessary modi-fications, to the hearing of an appeal under thissection as they apply for the purpose of the sum-mary disposal of a charge under the said section178C.”.
30.—The following section is inserted after section 179E (inserted
bysection 29 ) of the Principal Act:
“Suspension of
operation ofcertainpunishmentspendingappeal.179F.—The operation of a punishment awarded
(other than stoppage of local leave or shore leave)or a compensation order made under this Chaptershall be suspended—
(a) in any case until the time for bringing
an appeal (whether against the deter-mination, punishment or compensationorder, as the case may be) undersection 178E or 179D has expired, and
(b) in a case where the appeal is brought
within that time, until the appeal or, inthe case of an appeal under section179D, any further appeal is finallydetermined (and the determination,punishment or compensation order, asthe case may be, has been confirmed)or abandoned or the time for bringingany further appeal has expired.”.
35Pt.3 S.29
Insertion of new
section: suspensionof operation ofcertain punishmentspending appeal.Pt.3
Amendment of
section 184 ofPrincipal Act(regulations inrelation toinvestigation andsummarydisposition ofcharges).
36[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
31.—The following section is substituted for section 184 of the
Principal Act:
“Regulations
Regulations in
relation toinvestigationand summarydisposal ofcharges.184.—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the
Minister may make regulations, not inconsistentwith this Act, in relation to all or any of the follow-ing matters:
(a) the investigation and summary disposal
under this Chapter of charges againstpersons subject to military law, includ-ing the exercise of the right to elect fortrial by court-martial, which regu-lations may include:
(i) the practice and procedure to be
followed;
(ii) the form of notices and the giving
of such notices under thisChapter;
(iii) the summoning of witnesses and
the production of relevant docu-ments and other things;
(iv) evidence;
(v) the administration of oaths or sol-
emn declarations to witnesses in acase where the person charged issubject to military law anddemands that the witnesses besworn;
(b) where a person is remanded for trial by
court-martial pursuant to this Chapter,the appointment of an officer to take awritten summary of evidence in thecase;
(c) the officers in whom are to be vested
the powers and duties of authorisedofficers and commanding officers andthe officers in whom may be vested bydelegation the powers and duties ofsubordinate officers;
(d) the delegation to a subordinate officer
of power to deal summarily with acase;
(e) the making of an application to the
Director to deal summarily with acharge against a person for an offencespecified in Part II of the EleventhSchedule to this Act;
(f) the referral of charges for summary
investigation to an authorised officerunder section 177(2);[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(g) the reference back by the Director of
charges for summary disposal;
(h) the making and retention of records of
proceedings and determinations madein respect of the investigation and sum-mary disposal of charges;
(i) the effective dates of, and the carrying
into effect of, punishments awardedand compensation orders made undersection 177C, 178C or 179C, as the casemay be;
(j) the stoppage of local leave or shore
leave under section 178C or 179C,including the times at which any suchstoppage may be imposed;
(k) the additional duties which may be
awarded by a commanding officerunder section 178C or by a subordinateofficer under section 179C, includingthe nature of those duties and theperiod for which and the times atwhich those duties may be performedwhich period shall not in any caseexceed three hours per day for sevendays;
(l) the making of an appeal by a private or
seaman to a commanding officer undersection 179D;
(m) any person, matter or thing referred to
as prescribed or to be prescribed;
(n) any other matter or thing necessary for
carrying this Chapter into effect.
(2) Every regulation made under this section
shall be laid before each House of the Oireachtasas soon as may be after it is made and, if a resol-ution annulling the regulation is passed by eithersuch House within the next twenty-one days onwhich that House has sat after the regulation islaid before it, the regulation shall be annulledaccordingly, but without prejudice to the validityof anything previously done under theregulation.”.
Chapter 4
Courts-martial
32.—The following Chapter is inserted after Chapter IV of Part V
of the Principal Act:
37Pt.3 S.31
Insertion of new
Chapter: Court-MartialAdministrator.Pt.3 S.32
38[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
“Chapter IVA
Court-Martial Administrator
Appointment
of Court-MartialAdministrator.184A.—(1) An officer of the Permanent
Defence Force not below the army rank of colonelor the equivalent naval rank may by warrant ofthe Judge Advocate-General be appointed as theCourt-Martial Administrator.
(2) A warrant under this section may be made
subject to such restrictions, reservations, excep-tions and conditions as the Judge Advocate-General thinks fit including terms and conditionsrelating to the delegation by the Court-MartialAdministrator of his functions under this Act.
(3) A warrant under this section—
(a) may be addressed to an officer by name
or by designation of his office or partlyin one way and partly in another, and
(b) may or may not, according to the terms
of the warrant and the mode in whichit is addressed—
(i) be limited to an officer named, or
(ii) be extended to a person for the
time being performing the dutiesof the office named, or
(iii) be extended to the successors in
office of an officer.
(4) The Court-Martial Administrator shall be
independent in the performance of his functions.
(5) The Court-Martial Administrator shall
neither report on, nor be the subject of any reportin respect of, the performance of his functionsunder this Act.
Functions of
Court-MartialAdministrator.184B.—(1) The Court-Martial Administrator
shall manage and control generally the admini-stration and business of courts-martial and shallperform such other functions as may be specifiedor prescribed by or under this Act.
(2) The Court-Martial Administrator shall act
under the general supervision of the Judge Advo-cate-General.
(3) The Court-Martial Administrator shall
provide to the Judge Advocate-General suchinformation in relation to the performance of hisfunctions as the Judge Advocate-General mayfrom time to time require.
(4) The Court-Martial Administrator shall—[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) as directed by the Director under this
Part, convene general courts-martialand limited courts-martial and referany charge or other matter to the sum-mary court-martial, and
(b) in the case of a general court-martial or
limited court-martial, specify themembers of the court-martial board.
(5) Subject to the terms of the warrant under
section 184A, the functions of the Court-MartialAdministrator may be delegated by him from timeto time to any other person or persons or classor classes of persons for such purposes as may bespecified in the warrant.”.
33.—The following Chapter is inserted after Chapter IVA
(inserted by section 32 ) of Part V of the Principal Act:
“Chapter IVB
Director of Military Prosecutions
Appointment
of Director ofMilitaryProsecutions.184C.—(1) Subject to this Chapter, the
Government shall appoint an officer of the Perma-nent Defence Force to be the Director of MilitaryProsecutions (in this Act referred to as the‘Director’).
(2) Subject to this Chapter, an officer who is a
practising barrister or practising solicitor of notless than 10 years standing shall be qualified forappointment as the Director.
(3) For the purposes of this section service for
any period in a position in the full-time service ofthe State (including as a member of the PermanentDefence Force and as a civil servant within themeaning of the Civil Service Regulation Act 1956)for which qualification as a barrister or solicitorwas a requirement shall be deemed to be practiceas a barrister or a solicitor, as the case may be,for that period and an officer, while holding thatposition, shall be deemed to be a practising barris-ter or a practising solicitor, as the case may be.
(4) The Director shall not be below the army
rank of colonel or the equivalent naval rank.
Committee. 184D.—(1) For the purpose of identifying
officers and informing the Minister of their suit-ability for appointment as Director, there shall beestablished a committee consisting of—
(a) the Chief of Staff,
(b) a Judge of the High Court, nominated
by the President of the High Court,and
(c) the Director of Public Prosecutions.
39Pt.3 S.32
Insertion of new
Chapter: Directorof MilitaryProsecutions.Pt.3 S.33
40[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(2) ( a) In the case of the person specified in
subsection (1)( b) of this section signi-
fying at any time unwillingness orinability to act for any period as amember of the committee, the Pres-ident of the High Court may nominateany other available Judge of the HighCourt to be a member of the commit-tee in place of that person for thatperiod.
(b) In the case of the Director of Public
Prosecutions signifying at any timeunwillingness or inability to act for anyperiod as a member of the committee,the Minister may, after consultationwith the Attorney General, appoint asa member of the committee in place ofthe Director of Public Prosecutions,for that period, a practising barristernominated by the General Council ofthe Bar of Ireland or a practising solici-tor nominated by the Law Society ofIreland.
(3) The committee may adopt such procedures
as it considers appropriate to carry out its func-tions under this section.
(4) The committee shall, whenever so
requested by the Minister, select an officer orofficers for appointment under section 184C andshall inform the Minister of the selection madeand of his or their suitability for the appointment.
(5) The Government shall not appoint an
officer to be the Director unless the officer wasselected or amongst those selected by the commit-tee pursuant to a request under subsection (4) ofthis section in relation to that appointment, but—
(a) if the committee is unable to select a
suitable officer pursuant to a particularrequest under that subsection, or
(b) if the Government decide not to
appoint to be the Director the officeror any of the officers selected by thecommittee pursuant to a particularrequest under that subsection,
then either—
(i) the Government shall appoint an officer
to be the Director who was selected oramongst those selected by the commit-tee pursuant to a previous request (ifany) under that subsection in relationto that appointment, or
(ii) the Minister shall make a further
request to the committee under thatsubsection and the Government shall[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
appoint an officer to be the Director
who was selected or amongst thoseselected by the committee pursuant tothat request or pursuant to anotherrequest under that subsection inrelation to that appointment.
(6) All proceedings of the committee and all
communications to the committee shall be confi-dential and shall not be disclosed except for thepurposes of this Chapter.
Terms and
conditions ofappointment.184E.—(1) Subject to this Chapter, the Direc-
tor shall hold and vacate office on the terms andconditions determined by the Minister with theconsent of the Minister for Finance.
(2) The Director shall be independent in the
performance of his functions.
(3) The Director shall neither report on, nor be
the subject of any report in respect of, the per-formance of his functions under this Act.
(4) The Attorney General, the Director of
Public Prosecutions and the Director may consulttogether from time to time in relation to matterspertaining to the functions of the Director.
Prosecuting
officers.184F.—(1) The Director may appoint officers
to be prosecuting officers.
(2) An officer shall not be appointed as a pro-
secuting officer unless, at the date of appointmentunder subsection (1) of this section, the officer isa barrister or solicitor.
(3) A prosecuting officer shall hold and vacate
office in accordance with the terms of hisappointment.
(4) A prosecuting officer may, unless the Direc-
tor otherwise directs, exercise any function of theDirector.
Prosecution of
offences.184G.—(1) This section applies where a charge
has been referred to the Director under any of theprovisions of this Act.
(2) When a charge for an offence under this
Act is referred to the Director he may exerciseany of the powers conferred on him by any of theprovisions of this Act.
(3) Where the Director directs that a specified
offence or offences be tried by court-martial, heshall also decide the class of court-martial that isto try the offence or offences concerned and shalldirect the Court-Martial Administratoraccordingly.
(4) Where a direction has been given by the
Director for the trial by court-martial of a person
41Pt.3 S.33Pt.3 S.33
42[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
accused of an offence against military law, the
offence shall be taken to be prosecuted at the suitof the Director who shall be responsible for theconduct of all prosecutions at court-martial, andaccordingly the Director shall have, in respect ofthat offence, in addition to any other powers con-ferred on him by or under this Act, powers similarto those conferred by law on the Director of PublicProsecutions in respect of offences triable onindictment before a civil court.
Removal of
Director fromoffice.184H.—(1) Subject to section 184I, the Direc-
tor may be removed from office by the Govern-ment but only for stated reasons, includingbecause—
(a) he has become incapable, through ill-
health, either physical or mental, ofeffectively performing the functions ofthe office,
(b) he has failed to perform the functions of
the office with due diligence and effec-tiveness,
(c) he has engaged in conduct that brings
discredit on the office or that mayprejudice the proper performance ofthe functions of the office, or
(d) his removal from office would, in the
Government’s opinion, be in the bestinterests of the Defence Forces.
(2) On notifying the Director under section
184I(1) that the Government intends to considerremoving him from office, the Government mayimmediately suspend the Director from duty.
(3) The suspension from duty continues until
the Government makes a decision in relation tothe matter under consideration, but only if thereis no undue delay in taking steps under section184I or in making that decision.
Steps to be
taken beforeremoval ofDirector.184I.—(1) Before considering the Director’s
removal from office under section 184H theGovernment shall—
(a) notify the Director that the Govern-
ment intends to consider the matterand include in the notice a statementof their reasons for doing so, and
(b) give the Director an opportunity to
make representations as to why heought not to be removed from office.
(2) The Government may, if they consider it
necessary or appropriate to do so, appoint a Judgeof the High Court nominated by the President ofthe High Court to—[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) hold an inquiry into any matter giving
rise to a notification under subsection(1) of this section, and
(b) report to the Government on the find-
ings of the inquiry.
(3) A Judge of the High Court appointed under
this section to hold an inquiry may do one or moreof the following:
(a) direct a person, by notice delivered to
the person, to provide any informationthat is specified in the notice and isrequired for the purposes of theinquiry;
(b) direct any person, by notice delivered to
the person, to produce at the time andplace specified in the notice a docu-ment specified in the notice that is rel-evant to the inquiry and is in the per-son’s power or control;
(c) summon witnesses to attend the inquiry;
(d) direct a witness to answer a question put
to the witness at the inquiry;
(e) give any other direction that appears to
the Judge appointed under this section
to be necessary, just and reasonable forthe purposes of the inquiry;
(f) administer oaths and affirmations to
witnesses and examine witnessesattending the inquiry.
(4) A person whose evidence has been, is
being, or is to be given before an inquiry underthis section, or who produces or sends a documentto the inquiry pursuant to a summons or direction,as the case may be, under subsection (3) of thissection or who is required by such a summons ordirection to give evidence or produce a documentto the inquiry or to attend before the inquiry andthere to give evidence or produce a document,shall be entitled to the same privileges and immun-ities as if the person were a witness before theHigh Court.
(5) If a person fails or refuses to comply with
or disobeys a summons or direction under subsec-tion (3) of this section, the High Court may, onapplication by the Judge appointed under thissection—
(a) order the person in relation to whom
the application was made to complywith the direction or, in the case of asummons, to attend the inquiry, and
43Pt.3 S.33Pt.3 S.33
Insertion of new
Chapter: MilitaryJudge.[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) make such other (if any) order as it con-
siders necessary and just to enable thedirection to have full effect or, in thecase of a summons, to ensure theattendance at the inquiry.
(6) A person who—
(a) is notified under subsection (3) of this
section and who, without lawfulexcuse, refuses or fails to comply witha direction under paragraph ( a)o r( b)
of that subsection,
(b) fails, without lawful excuse, to attend an
inquiry in response to a summonsunder subsection (3)( c) of this section,
(c) refuses to answer a question that the
Judge of the High Court conducting
the inquiry may legally direct the per-son to answer, or
(d) does or omits to do in relation to the
inquiry any other thing the doing oromission of which would, if the inquiryhad been a proceeding in the HighCourt, have been contempt of thatCourt,
is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 monthsor both.
(7) If an inquiry is held, the Government
shall—
(a) consider the report on the findings of
the inquiry,
(b) make a copy of the report available to
the Director whose removal fromoffice is the subject of the report, and
(c) give the Director an opportunity to
make representations relating to thereport.
(8) As soon as practicable after the Director is
removed from office under section 184H, theMinister shall cause a statement of the reasons forthe removal to be laid before each House of theOireachtas.”.
34.—The following Chapter is inserted after Chapter IVB
(inserted by section 33 ) of Part V of the Principal Act:[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
“Chapter IVC
Military Judge
Military judge. 184J.—(1) The President may appoint, on the
advice of the Government, one, or more than one,qualified officer of the Permanent Defence Forceto be a military judge.
(2) An officer who is a practising barrister or a
practising solicitor of not less than 10 years stand-ing shall be qualified for appointment as amilitary judge.
(3) For the purposes of this section service for
any period in a position in the full-time service ofthe State (including as a member of the PermanentDefence Force and as a civil servant within themeaning of the Civil Service Regulation Act 1956)for which qualification as a barrister or solicitorwas a requirement shall be deemed to be practiseas a barrister or a solicitor, as the case may be,for that period and an officer, while holding thatposition, shall be deemed to be a practising barris-ter or a practising solicitor, as the case may be.
(4) The military judge, or where there is more
than one military judge, the Chief Military Judge,shall not be below the army rank of colonel or theequivalent naval rank.
Committee. 184K.—(1) For the purpose of identifying
officers and informing the Government of the suit-ability of those officers for appointment to judicialoffice, there shall be established a committee con-sisting of—
(a) the Chief of Staff,
(b) the Judge Advocate-General, and
(c) a Judge of the High Court, nominated
by the President of the High Court.
(2) The committee may adopt such procedures
as it considers appropriate to carry out its func-tions under this section.
(3) The committee shall, whenever so
requested by the Minister, select an officer orofficers for appointment under this section andshall inform the Minister of the selection madeand of his or their suitability for the appointmentand the Government shall consider for appoint-ment the officer or officers so selected.
(4) The committee shall not submit or recom-
mend the name of an officer to the Minister underthis section unless the officer concerned satisfiesthe requirements of section 184J(2) as regards theproposed appointment, and the committee shallnot recommend the name of the officer to the
45Pt.3 S.34Pt.3 S.34
46[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Minister unless, in the opinion of the committee,
the officer—
(a) has displayed in his or her practice as a
barrister or solicitor, as the case maybe, a degree of competence and adegree of probity appropriate to andconsistent with the appointment as amilitary judge,
(b) is suitable on grounds of character and
temperament,
(c) is otherwise suitable, and
(d) complies with the requirements of sub-
section (5) of this section.
(5) An officer who wishes to be considered for
appointment under section 184J shall undertake inwriting to the committee, if appointed as a militaryjudge, to take such courses of training or edu-cation, or both, as may be required by the JudgeAdvocate-General.
(6) All proceedings of the committee and all
communications to the committee shall be confi-dential and shall not be disclosed except for thepurposes of this Chapter.
Terms and
conditions ofappointment.184L.—(1) Subject to this Chapter, a military
judge shall hold and vacate office on and subjectto the terms and conditions (including terms andconditions relating to remuneration andsuperannuation) determined by the Minister withthe consent of the Minister for Finance.
(2) A military judge shall be independent in the
performance of his judicial functions under thisAct.
(3) A military judge shall not hold any other
office or employment in respect of which remuner-ation is payable.
(4) The remuneration of a military judge shall
not be reduced during his continuance in office.
(5) A military judge may at his own request be
relieved of office by the President.
(6) It shall be a condition of his appointment
that a military judge—
(a) who is relieved of office by the Pres-
ident under subsection (5) of thissection shall cease to be an officer,
(b) who ceases to be an officer under any
of the provisions of this Act shall cease
to be a military judge,[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(c) who retires in accordance with the terms
and conditions of his appointmentunder this Chapter shall cease to bean officer,
(d) who is removed from office under
section 184O, shall cease to be anofficer.
(7) Every officer appointed as a military judge
under this Chapter shall, before entering upon hisduties under this Act and in any case not later than10 days after the date of his appointment, swearan oath or make a solemn declaration in the pre-scribed form which shall be administered by theJudge Advocate-General and a military judge whodeclines or neglects to swear an oath or make sucha declaration shall be deemed to have vacated hisoffice.
(8) A military judge shall neither report on, nor
be the subject of any report in respect of, the per-formance of his functions under this Act.
Functions of
military judge.184M.—A military judge shall preside at courts-
martial and shall perform any other judicial func-tions that may be prescribed.
Chief Military
Judge.184N.—(1) The President may appoint, on the
advice of the Government, a military judge to bethe Chief Military Judge.
(2) The Chief Military Judge shall have such
functions as are prescribed including assignmentof military judges to preside at courts-martial andto perform other judicial duties under this Act.
(3) The Chief Military Judge may delegate any
of the Chief Military Judge’s functions to amilitary judge.
Removal of
military judgefrom office.184O.—(1) Subject to section 184P, a military
judge may be removed from office by the Pres-ident on the advice of the Government but onlyfor stated reasons including because—
(a) he has become incapable, through ill-
health, either physical or mental, ofeffectively performing the functions ofthe office,
(b) he has failed to perform the functions of
the office with due diligence and effec-tiveness,
(c) he has engaged in conduct that brings
discredit on the office or that mayprejudice the proper performance ofthe functions of the office, or
(d) his removal from office would, in the
Government’s opinion, be in the bestinterests of the Defence Forces.
47Pt.3 S.34Pt.3 S.34
48[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(2) On notifying a military judge under section
184P(1) that the Government intends to considerhis removal from office, the Government mayimmediately suspend the military judge from duty.
(3) The suspension from duty continues until
the Government makes a decision in relation tothe matter under consideration, but only if thereis no undue delay in taking steps under section184P or in making that decision.
Steps to be
taken beforeremoval ofmilitary judge.184P.—(1) Before considering removal of a
military judge from office under section 184O theGovernment shall—
(a) notify the military judge that the
Government intends to consider thematter and include in the notice astatement of their reasons for doingso, and
(b) give the military judge an opportunity
to make representations as to why heought not to be removed from office.
(2) The Government may, if they consider it
necessary or appropriate to do so, appoint a Judgeof the High Court nominated by the President ofthe High Court to—
(a) hold an inquiry into any matter giving
rise to a notification under subsection(1) of this section, and
(b) report to the Government on the find-
ings of the inquiry.
(3) A Judge of the High Court appointed under
this section to hold an inquiry may do one or moreof the following:
(a) direct a person, by notice delivered to
the person, to provide any informationthat is specified in the notice and isrequired for the purposes of theinquiry;
(b) direct any person, by notice delivered to
the person, to produce at the time andplace specified in the notice a docu-ment specified in the notice that is rel-evant to the inquiry and is in the per-son’s power or control;
(c) summon witnesses to attend the inquiry;
(d) direct a witness to answer a question put
to the witness at the inquiry;
(e) give any other direction that appears to
the Judge appointed under this sectionto be necessary, just and reasonable forthe purposes of the inquiry;[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(f) administer oaths and affirmations to
witnesses and examine witnessesattending the inquiry.
(4) A person whose evidence has been, is
being, or is to be given before an inquiry underthis section, or who produces or sends a documentto the inquiry pursuant to a summons or direction,as the case may be, under subsection (3) of thissection or who is required by such a summons ordirection to give evidence or produce a documentto the inquiry or to attend before the inquiry andthere to give evidence or produce a document,shall be entitled to the same privileges and immun-ities as if the person were a witness before theHigh Court.
(5) If a person fails or refuses to comply with
or disobeys a direction or summons under subsec-tion (3) of this section, the High Court may, onapplication by the Judge appointed under thissection—
(a) order the person in relation to whom
the application was made to complywith the direction or, in the case of asummons, to attend the inquiry, and
(b) make such other (if any) order as it con-
siders necessary and just to enable thedirection to have full effect or, in thecase of a summons, to ensure theattendance at the inquiry.
(6) A person who—
(a) is notified under subsection (3) of this
section and who, without lawfulexcuse, refuses or fails to comply witha direction under paragraph ( a)o r( b)
of that subsection,
(b) fails, without lawful excuse, to attend an
inquiry in response to a summonsunder subsection (3)( c) of this section,
(c) refuses to answer a question that the
Judge of the High Court conductingthe inquiry may legally direct the per-son to answer, or
(d) does or omits to do in relation to the
inquiry any other thing the doing oromission of which would, if the inquiryhad been a proceeding in the HighCourt, have been contempt of thatCourt,
is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 monthsor both.
49Pt.3 S.34Pt.3 S.34
Amendment of
section 185 ofPrincipal Act(acquittal orconviction to barsubsequent trial bycourt-martial).
Amendment of
section 186 ofPrincipal Act(classes of courts-martial).
Amendment of
section 187 ofPrincipal Act(convening ofcourts-martial).
50[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(7) If an inquiry is held, the Government
shall—
(a) consider the report on the findings of
the inquiry,
(b) make a copy of the report available to
the military judge whose removal fromoffice is the subject of the report, and
(c) give the military judge an opportunity
to make representations relating tothe report.
(8) As soon as practicable after the military
judge is removed from office under section 184O,the Minister shall cause a statement of the reasonsfor the removal to be laid before each House ofthe Oireachtas.”.
35.—Section 185 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) Where a person subject to military law has been
acquitted of an offence by a court-martial, he shall not beliable to be tried again by a court-martial in respect ofthat offence.”,
and
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) Where a person subject to military law has been
convicted of an offence by a court-martial, he shall not beliable to be tried again by a court-martial in respect of thatoffence unless the conviction has been quashed and a re-trial ordered by the Courts-Martial Appeal Court pursuantto the Criminal Procedure Act 1993.”.
36.—The following section is substituted for section 186 of the
Principal Act:
“Classes of
courts-martial.186.—There shall be three classes of courts-mar-
tial, namely, general courts-martial, limited courts-martial and the summary court-martial.”.
37.—The following section is substituted for section 187 of the
Principal Act:
“Convening of
courts-martial.187.—(1) Where the Director directs that a
specified offence or offences be tried by court-martial, the Court-Martial Administrator shall,subject to the directions of the Director, convenea general court-martial or limited court-martial, orrefer the matter for trial by summary court-martial.
(2) A court-martial may sit in any place
whether within or outside the State.”.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
38.—The following section is inserted after section 187 of the Prin-
cipal Act:
“Summary
court-martial.187A.—(1) There shall be a court-martial to be
known as the summary court-martial.
(2) Every military judge is authorised to pre-
side at a summary court-martial and a militaryjudge who does so constitutes the summarycourt-martial.
(3) The summary court-martial shall, subject to
section 192, have jurisdiction to hear—
(a) charges or other matters referred to it
by the Court-Martial Administrator asdirected by the Director,
(b) appeals under section 178E from deter-
minations made, punishments awardedor compensation orders made undersection 177C or 178C, and
(c) applications for legal aid.”.
39.—The following section is substituted for section 189 of the
Principal Act:
“General
court-martial.189.—(1) A general court-martial shall consist
of—
(a) a military judge, and
(b) save in the case of a general court-mar-
tial convened pursuant to subsection(8) or (11) of section 212A, a court-martial board of not less than fivemembers specified by or on behalf ofthe Court-Martial Administrator.
(2) Where the accused is an officer, the court-
martial board shall include—
(a) an officer of the Permanent Defence
Force not below the army rank ofcolonel or the equivalent naval rankand in any case not of a lower rankthan the accused, and
(b) not less than four other officers, none of
whom shall be below the army rank ofcaptain or the equivalent naval rank.
(3) Where the accused is not an officer, the
court-martial board—
(a) shall include—
(i) an officer of the Permanent
Defence Force not below thearmy rank of colonel or the equiv-alent naval rank, and
51Pt.3
Insertion of new
section: summarycourt-martial.
Amendment of
section 189 ofPrincipal Act(constitution ofgeneral courts-martial).Pt.3 S.39
Amendment of
section 190 ofPrincipal Act(constitution oflimited courts-martial).
Amendment of
section 191 ofPrincipal Act(disqualificationsfor membership ofcourts-martial).
52[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(ii) not less than three other officers,
none of whom shall be below thearmy rank of captain or the equiv-alent naval rank,
and
(b) may include not more than one non-
commissioned officer who shall not bebelow the army rank of battalion quar-ter-master sergeant or the equivalentnaval rank and in any case not of alower rank than the accused.”.
40.—The following section is substituted for section 190 of the
Principal Act:
“Limited
court-martial.190.—(1) A limited court-martial shall consist
of—
(a) a military judge, and
(b) save in the case of a limited court-mar-
tial convened pursuant to subsection(8) or (11) of section 212A, a court-martial board of not less than threemembers specified by or on behalf ofthe Court-Martial Administrator.
(2) The court-martial board—
(a) shall include—
(i) an officer of the Permanent
Defence Force not below thearmy rank of commandant or theequivalent naval rank, and
(ii) at least one other officer who shall
not be below the army rank oflieutenant or the equivalent navalrank,
and
(b) may include not more than one non-
commissioned officer who shall not bebelow the army rank of battalion quar-ter-master sergeant or the equivalentnaval rank and in any case not of alower rank than the accused.”.
41.—The following section is substituted for section 191 of the
Principal Act:
“Membership
of court-martial board.191.—(1) None of the following persons may
serve as a member of a court-martial board:
(a) the Court-Martial Administrator or a
member of his staff;[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) the Director or a member of his staff;
(c) a member of the Defence Forces who
has examined into or advised on thematters on which any charge againstthe accused is based;
(d) a person who has been or may be sum-
moned as a witness for the prosecutionor the accused before the court-mar-tial concerned;
(e) a member of the Defence Forces who
investigated the charge against theaccused or took down any summary orabstract of evidence against theaccused or who was a member of acourt of inquiry inquiring into thematters on which the charge againstthe accused is based;
(f) a member of the military police corps;
(g) any member of the Defence Forces who
is a barrister or solicitor;
(h) any member of the Defence Forces who
has a personal interest in the case;
(i) any member of the Defence Forces who
is not for the time being subject tomilitary law;
(j) an officer or non-commissioned officer
who is serving in the same militarychain of command as the accused.
(2) A member of a court-martial board shall
neither report on, nor be the subject of any reportin respect of, the performance of his functions assuch member under this Act.”.
42.—Section 192 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) Subject to and in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, a general court-martial, limited court-martialor summary court-martial shall, in addition to any otherpowers conferred on it by this Act, have jurisdiction to tryand punish any person for an offence against military lawcommitted by the person while subject to military law asan officer or as a man.”,
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) In this section ‘relevant offence’ means—
(a) the offence of treason or murder, or
(b) an offence under section 3, as amended, of the
Geneva Conventions Act 1962 or an offence
53Pt.3 S.41
Amendment of
section 192 ofPrincipal Act(jurisdiction ofcourts-martial).Pt.3 S.42
54[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
under section 7 (genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes) or 8 (ancillaryoffences) of the International Criminal CourtAct 2006, or
(c) manslaughter, rape, rape under section 4 (within
the meaning of the Criminal Law (Rape)(Amendment) Act 1990) or aggravated sexualassault (within the meaning of the CriminalLaw (Rape) (Amendment) Act 1990), or
(d) an offence under the Criminal Justice (United
Nations Convention against Torture) Act2000, or
(e) an offence under the Criminal Justice (Safety of
United Nations Workers) Act 2000, or
(f) an offence under the Criminal Justice (Terrorist
Offences) Act 2005.
(1B) A summary court-martial shall not have
jurisdiction—
(a) to try any person who is for the time being an
officer holding the army rank of lieutenantcolonel or the equivalent naval rank or highercommissioned rank,
(b) to try any person for a relevant offence,
(c) to award to any person any sentence greater
than imprisonment for a term of six months, or
(d) in the case of an appeal under section 178E, to
award any punishment greater than thatawardable on summary disposal of the matterunder section 177C or 178C, as appropriate.”,
(c) by substituting the following for subsection (2):
“(2) A limited court-martial shall not have
jurisdiction—
(a) to try any person for any offence against
military law committed by the person whilesubject to military law as an officer,
(b) to try any person who is for the time being an
officer or a man of the army rank of battalionquarter-master sergeant or the equivalentnaval rank or of any higher non-com-missioned rank,
(c) to try any person for a relevant offence, or
(d) to award to any person any sentence greater
than imprisonment for a term of two years.”,
(d) by substituting the following for subsection (3):
“(3) Subject to subsection (3A) of this section, a
general court-martial shall not have jurisdiction to try any[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
person subject to military law for a relevant offence unless
the offence was committed while the person was on activeservice or while the person was despatched for service out-side the State for any purpose specified in section 3 of theDefence (Amendment) Act 2006.”,
(e) by inserting the following after subsection (3):
“(3A) In the case of rape, rape under section 4 (within
the meaning of the Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment)Act 1990) or aggravated sexual assault (within the mean-ing of the Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act 1990),where the offence was committed by a person subject tomilitary law who was neither on active service nordespatched for service outside the State for any purposespecified in section 3 of the Defence (Amendment) Act2006 when the offence was committed, a general court-martial may try any person subject to military law on acharge of having committed that offence where—
(a) the person in respect of whom the offence was
committed is, or was when the offence wascommitted, subject to military law, and hasconsented in writing to the trial of the offenceby court-martial, and
(b) the Director of Public Prosecutions has given his
prior consent.”,
and
(f) in subsection (4)( b), by substituting “the Director certify-
ing that as respects the trial of a civil offence” for “theofficer convening a court-martial for the trial of a civiloffence certifying that as respects such trial”.
43.—The following section is substituted for section 193 of the
Principal Act:
“Dissolution of
courts-martial.193.—(1) This section applies to the dissolution
of a general court-martial or limited court-martial.
(2) The Court-Martial Administrator may dis-
solve a court-martial at any time before it has beensworn, where he considers that by reason of theexigencies of the service or for any other reason itis desirable to do so.
(3) The military judge for a trial by court-mar-
tial may dissolve the court-martial at any timeafter it has been sworn where he considers it tobe necessary or expedient in the interests of theadministration of justice.
(4) Where a court-martial has been sworn and
the military judge dies or for any other reason isunavailable, the court-martial may be dissolved byanother military judge or by the Court-MartialAdministrator, as appropriate.
(5) The military judge shall dissolve the court-
martial—
55Pt.3 S.42
Amendment of
section 193 ofPrincipal Act(dissolution ofcourts-martial).Pt.3 S.43
Amendment of
section 194 ofPrincipal Act(admission tocourts-martial).
56[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) where, on account of the illness of the
accused at any time before the finding,it is impossible, in the opinion of themilitary judge, to continue the trialwithin a reasonable time, or
(b) where at any time after the court-mar-
tial is sworn, and before the finding,the number of members of the court-martial board is reduced below theminimum number of membersrequired for the trial—
(i) by reason of the death of a member
or the discharge of a member bythe military judge owing to hisbeing incapable through illness orany other cause of continuing toact as a member, or
(ii) because the military judge directs
that a member shall not serve orshall not continue to serve as amember where he considers thatfor any stated reason it is desirablein the interests of justice.
(6) Where a court-martial is dissolved under
this section, the accused may, on the directions ofthe Director, be retried by another court-martialin accordance with this Part.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (5) of this
section the minimum number of members of acourt-martial board shall be—
(a) in the case of a general court-martial, 5
members (including the officerreferred to in section 189(2)( a)o r
(3)(a)(i), as the case may be), and
(b) in the case of a limited court-martial, 3
members (including the officerreferred to in section 190(2)( a)(i)).”.
44.—The following section is substituted for section 194 of the
Principal Act:
“Admission to
courts-martial.194.—(1) Subject to this section and to any
other enactment, proceedings before a court-mar-tial shall be held in public.
(2) Where the military judge presiding at a
court-martial is satisfied that because of the natureor circumstances of the case or otherwise in theinterests of justice or the security of the State orof the Defence Forces that it is desirable to do so,he may do any one or more of the following:[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) exclude the public or any portion of the
public or any particular person or per-sons from the court during the wholeor any part of a trial;
(b) prohibit the publication of information
in relation to the proceedings or anyparticular part of them;
(c) impose restrictions or limitations on
publication.
(3) In any proceedings for an offence which is,
in the opinion of the military judge, of an indecentor obscene nature (including proceedings for rape,rape under section 4 (within the meaning of theCriminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act 1990) orsexual assault or aggravated sexual assault (bothwithin the meaning of the Criminal Law (Rape)(Amendment) Act 1990), attempted aggravatedsexual assault or sexual assault or aiding, abetting,counselling or procuring the offence of aggravatedsexual assault or sexual assault or attemptedaggravated sexual assault or sexual assault or ofincitement to the offence of aggravated sexualassault or sexual assault or conspiracy to commitany of the foregoing offences), the military judgeshall, subject to subsections (4) and (5) of thissection, exclude from the court-martial during thetrial all persons except officers of the court, per-sons directly concerned in the proceedings, bonafide representatives of the press and such otherpersons (if any) as the military judge may in hisdiscretion permit to remain.
(4) In any proceedings for an offence referred
to in subsection (3) of this section—
(a) in the case of the accused person, an
assisting person or, where the accusedperson so requests, a parent, relativeor friend of the accused person shall beentitled to remain in court during thewhole of the trial, and
(b) in the case of a person in respect of
whom the offence is alleged to havebeen committed, where the person sorequests, a parent, relative or friend of
the person shall be entitled to remainin court while that person is giving evi-dence as a witness before the court-martial.
(5) In any proceedings to which subsection (2)
or (3) of this section applies the findings and thesentence (if any) shall be announced in public.
(6) Witnesses, other than the accused person,
shall not be admitted to a trial, except when underexamination or by specific leave of the militaryjudge presiding at the trial concerned.
57Pt.3 S.44Pt.3 S.44
Amendment of
section 195 ofPrincipal Act(divers matters ofprocedure).
Amendment of
section 197 ofPrincipal Act(challenges byaccused).
Insertion of new
section: rulings anddirections.
58[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(7) No persons other than the members of the
court-martial board shall be present during anydeliberations by the court-martial board as to itsfindings.”.
45.—The following section is substituted for section 195 of the
Principal Act:
“Divers
matters ofprocedure.195.—(1) A court-martial may adjourn from
time to time and from place to place whenever themilitary judge considers adjournment desirable.
(2) The military judge and, in the case of a
general court-martial or a limited court-martial,the court-martial board, after it is sworn andbefore making its findings, if the military judgeconsiders it appropriate, may view any place, per-son or thing which in the opinion of the militaryjudge it is expedient for the purposes of the pro-ceedings that he and, as the case may be, thecourt-martial board should see.
(3) For the purposes of viewing any place, per-
son or thing under subsection (2) of this section,the military judge shall give such directions asappear to him to be expedient for the purpose ofpreventing undue communication with the court-martial board during the viewing.”.
46.—The following section is substituted for section 197 of the
Principal Act:
“Challenges by
accused.197.—(1) When a court-martial is assembled
and before the members of the court-martialboard are sworn, their names shall be read to theaccused who shall then be asked if he objects toany of them and in the event of an objection thedecision as to whether to allow the objection shallbe made by the military judge in accordance withthe procedure prescribed by court-martial rules.
(2) The procedure for the replacement of a
member of the court-martial board in respect ofwhom an objection has been allowed shall be asprescribed, subject to the same right of theaccused to object to the member selected to fillthe subsequent vacancy in accordance with subsec-tion (1) of this section.”.
47.—The following section is inserted after section 197 of the Prin-
cipal Act:
“Rulings and
directions.197A.—(1) Rulings and directions on questions
of law, practice or procedure relative to the chargeor trial shall be given by the military judge presid-ing at a court-martial.
(2) Any rulings or directions given under sub-
section (1) of this section shall be binding on thecourt-martial concerned.”.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
48.—The following section is substituted for section 198 of the
Principal Act:
“Courts-
martial:findings andsentence.198.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, in the case of a general court-martial orlimited court-martial, a finding of guilty on anycharge shall be decided by a majority of at leasttwo-thirds of the members of the court-martialboard, after the military judge has summed up thelaw and the evidence.
(2) Where two-thirds of the members of the
court-martial board is not a whole number, thenext highest whole number shall be taken to betwo-thirds for the purposes of subsection (1) ofthis section.
(3) If the number of members of the court-mar-
tial board who vote for a guilty finding on anycharge is less than that referred to in subsection(1) of this section the accused shall be acquittedof that charge.
(4) The military judge presiding at a general
court-martial or limited court-martial is notentitled to vote on the finding.
(5) The military judge presiding at a court-mar-
tial shall determine the sentence.”.
49.—The following section is substituted for section 199 of the
Principal Act:
“Swearing of
court-martial.199.—(1) When a court-martial board is consti-
tuted with the required number of persons whoare not objected to or the objections to whom havenot been allowed, an oath in the form prescribedby court-martial rules shall be administered by theperson or persons so prescribed to—
(a) each member of the court-martial
board, and
(b) every interpreter and shorthand writer
or other note-taker in attendance.
(2) If a person required by this section to take
an oath objects to taking an oath or is objected toas incompetent to take an oath, the military judgeshall, if satisfied of the sincerity of the objectionor, where the competence of a person to take anoath is objected to, of the oath having no bindingeffect on the conscience of that person, permit theperson, instead of being sworn, to make a solemndeclaration in the prescribed form, and for thepurposes of this Act that declaration is deemed tobe an oath.
(3) For the purposes of this section, different
forms of oath may be prescribed for members of
59Pt.3
Amendment of
section 198 ofPrincipal Act(voting at courts-martial).
Amendment of
section 199 ofPrincipal Act(swearing of court).Pt.3 S.49
Amendment of
section 202 ofPrincipal Act(mental disorder attime of trial).
60[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
a court-martial board, interpreters and shorthand
writers or other note-takers, and different personsmay be prescribed to administer oaths and totake declarations.”.
50.—Section 202 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) in paragraph ( a), by substituting “the military judge
presiding at the court-martial” for “the court-mar-tial”, and
(ii) in paragraph ( b)—
(I) by substituting “the military judge, if he is” for
“the court-martial, if it is”, and
(II) by substituting “the Mental Health Act 2001” for
“the Act of 2001”,
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) In the case of a general court-martial or limited
court-martial, the question of whether a person chargedwith an offence is fit to be tried shall be determined, andthe finding shall be made, by the military judge sittingalone.”,
(c) by deleting subsection (2),
(d) in subsection (3), by inserting the following after para-
graph ( b):
“(bb) in the case of a general court-martial or limited
court-martial, object to a member of the court-martial board to whom he might wish toobject,”,
(e) by substituting the following for subsection (4):
“(4) After the military judge presiding at a court-mar-
tial has found that a person charged with an offence isunfit to take his trial, the military judge may on applicationto him and without prejudice to any further proceedingsallow evidence to be adduced before the court-martial asto whether or not that person did the act or made theomission alleged against him and if the summary court-martial or, in the case of a general court-martial or limitedcourt-martial, the court-martial board, is satisfied thatthere is a reasonable doubt that the person committed thatact or made the omission, the summary court-martial orthe court-martial board, as the case may be, shall acquithim.”,
and
(f) by inserting the following subsection:
“(5) In this section and in section 203 ‘consultant psy-
chiatrist’ has the same meaning as in the Mental HealthAct 2001.”.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
51.—Section 203 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) by substituting “the summary court-martial, or in the
case of a general court-martial or limited court-mar-tial, the court-martial board, finds” for “the court-martial finds”, and
(ii) by substituting “the summary court-martial, or in the
case of a general court-martial or limited court-mar-tial, the court-martial board, shall specially find” for“the court-martial shall specially find”,
(b) by substituting the following for subsection (2):
“(2) If the military judge presiding at the court-martial
having considered any evidence adduced before the court-martial is satisfied that the person found not guilty byreason of insanity is suffering from a mental disorder(within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 2001) andis in need of in-patient care or treatment in a designatedcentre the military judge shall, after consultation with theclinical director of the designated centre concerned, com-mit him to a specified designated centre until an order ismade under section 13 of the Criminal Law (Insanity)Act 2006.”,
(c) by inserting the following after subsection (2):
“(2A) In this section ‘clinical director’ shall have the
same meaning as in section 1 of the Criminal Law(Insanity) Act 2006.”,
and
(d) by deleting subsection (3).
52.—The following sections are inserted after section 203A
(inserted by the Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2006) of the PrincipalAct:
“Appeals
(mentaldisorder attime of trial).203B.—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Courts-
Martial Appeal Court (in this section and insections 203C and 203D referred to as ‘the Court’)from a finding by a court-martial pursuant tosection 202 that a person charged with an offenceis unfit to take his trial.
(2) Where the Court makes an order pursuant
to section 19A (inserted by the Defence
(Amendment) Act 2007 ) of the Courts-Martial
Appeals Act 1983 that the appellant be tried orretried, as the case may be, by court-martial forthe offence alleged, the appellant may, subject tothe directions of the Director, be tried or retriedfor an offence other than the offence alleged inrespect of which he was found unfit to take histrial being an offence of which he might be foundguilty on a charge for the offence alleged.
61Pt.3
Amendment of
section 203 ofPrincipal Act(mental disorder attime of commissionof offence).
Insertion of new
sections: appeals toCourts-MartialAppeal Court.Pt.3 S.52
Insertion of new
section: effect ofcertain offences onpersons in respectof whomcommitted.
Amendment of
section 206 ofPrincipal Act(effective dates ofsentences by courts-martial).
62[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Appeals (not
guilty byreason ofinsanity).203C.—A person tried for an offence by court-
martial and found not guilty by reason of insanitymay appeal against the finding to the Court pursu-ant to section 19B (inserted by the Defence
(Amendment) Act 2007 ) of the Courts-Martial
Appeals Act 1983.
Appeals (order
of committalunder section202 or 203).203D.—An appeal against a decision by a court-
martial to make or not to make an order of com-mittal under section 202(1)( b) or 203(2) shall lie
at the instance of the person charged with theoffence concerned or the Director to the Courtpursuant to section 19C (inserted by the Defence
(Amendment) Act 2007 ) of the Courts-Martial
Appeals Act 1983.”.
53.—The following section is inserted after section 205 of the Prin-
cipal Act:
“Effect of
certainoffences onpersons inrespect ofwhomcommitted.205A.—(1) In determining the punishment to
be awarded to a person for an offence to whichthis section applies, the military judge presiding atthe court-martial concerned shall take intoaccount, and may, where necessary, receive evi-dence or submissions concerning, any effect(whether long-term or otherwise) of the offenceon the person in respect of whom the offencewas committed.
(2) This section applies to—
(a) a sexual offence within the meaning of
the Criminal Evidence Act 1992 (asamended by the Criminal Law (SexualOffences) Act 2006),
(b) an offence involving violence or the
threat of violence to a person, and
(c) an offence consisting of attempting or
conspiring to commit, or aiding, abet-ting, counselling, procuring or incitingthe commission of, an offence men-tioned in paragraph ( a)o r( b)o ft h i s
subsection.
(3) Where a military judge is determining the
punishment to be awarded to a person for anoffence to which this section applies, the militaryjudge shall, upon application by the person inrespect of whom the offence was committed, hearthe evidence of the person in respect of whom theoffence was committed as to the effect of theoffence on that person.”.
54.—The following subsection is substituted for subsection (1) of
section 206 of the Principal Act:
“(1) Subject to section 212A, every term of imprisonment or
detention to which a person is sentenced by a court-martial,whether the person is already undergoing sentence or not, shall,[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be reckoned to
commence on the day on which the sentence is signed by themilitary judge presiding at the court-martial or on such earlierdate as the military judge may direct.”.
55.—The following subsection is substituted for subsection (3) of
section 207 of the Principal Act:
“(3) For the purposes of this section and section 208 (except
subsection (2) of section 208), references to a court-martial shallbe deemed to include an officer taking a written summary ofevidence in accordance with rules of procedure.”.
56.—Section 208 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) by inserting the following after paragraph ( b)—
“(ba) fails, neglects or refuses to comply with a
direction of the military judge undersection 195, or
(bb) wilfully gives evidence to a court-martial
which is material to the court-martial andwhich he knows to be false or does notbelieve to be true, or
(bc) by act or omission, obstructs or hinders the
court-martial in the performance of itsfunctions, or”,
(ii) by substituting the following for paragraph ( c):
“(c) does or omits to do any other thing, which,
if the court-martial were a civil court hav-ing power to commit for contempt, wouldbe contempt of that court,”,
and
(iii) by substituting “ \3,000” for “£1,000”,
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) A prosecution for an offence under this section
may be brought only by or with the consent of the Directorof Public Prosecutions.”,
and
(c) in subsection (2), by substituting the following for para-
graph ( a):
“(a) If any person subject to military law is guilty of
contempt of a court-martial by using insultingor threatening language or by causing anyinterruption or disturbance in the proceedingsof the court-martial, the military judge presid-ing at the court-martial, if he considers itexpedient, instead of the offender being tried
63Pt.3 S.54
Amendment of
section 207 ofPrincipal Act(summoning andprivilege ofwitnesses at courts-martial).
Amendment of
section 208 ofPrincipal Act(contempt of court-martial).Pt.3 S.56
Amendment of
section 209 ofPrincipal Act(punishments whichmay be awarded toofficers by courts-martial).
64[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
by court-martial, may by order under his
hand—
(i) order the offender to be imprisoned, or, in
the case of a man, to undergo detention,for a period not exceeding ninety days, or
(ii) where the offender is a person subject to
military law as an officer under section118(1)( a), (b)o r( c), award a fine not
exceeding fourteen days’ pay at the mostrecent rate payable, or
(iii) where the offender is a person subject to
military law as an officer under section118(1)( d)o r( e), award a fine not
exceeding the maximum fine awardablefor the time being by a court-martial to anofficer holding the rank of second lieuten-ant who is in receipt of the maximum payapplicable to that rank, or
(iv) where the offender is a person subject to
military law as a man under section 119( a)
or ( b), award a fine of an amount not
exceeding fourteen days’ pay at the mostrecent rate payable, or
(v) where the offender is a person subject to
military law as a man under section 119( c)
or ( d), award a fine not exceeding the
maximum fine awardable for the timebeing by a court-martial to a man holdingthe rank of private of the highest gradewho is in receipt of the maximum payapplicable to that rank.”.
Chapter 5
Punishments awardable by Courts-martial for Offences against
Military Law
57.—Section 209 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) Subject to section 192, punishments may be
awarded in respect of offences against military law com-mitted by persons subject to military law as officers andconvicted by court-martial according to the followingscale:
SCALE.
A. Imprisonment for life or any specified period.B. Dismissal with disgrace from the Defence Forces.
C. Dismissal from the Defence Forces.D. Where the person convicted is an officer, reduction to
any lower commissioned rank.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
E. Forfeiture of all seniority of rank or of a specified term
of seniority.
F. Reduction to any lower point on the scale of pay for
the rank held.
G. (a) In the case of a person subject to military law as an
officer under section 118(1)( a), (b)o r( c), a fine
not exceeding fourteen days’ pay of the personat the most recent rate payable.
(b) In the case of a person subject to military law as
an officer under section 118(1)( d)o r( e), a fine
not exceeding the maximum fine awardable forthe time being by a court-martial to an officerholding the rank of second lieutenant who is inreceipt of the maximum pay applicable to thatrank.
(c) In the case of a person who is not a member of the
Defence Forces but who was an officer when theoffence was committed, a fine not exceeding anamount equal to fourteen days’ pay at the mostrecent rate applicable to his former rank.
H. Severe reprimand.I. Reprimand.”,
(b) by substituting the following for subsection (5):
“(5) ( a) Where an officer is sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of more than six months, themilitary judge shall, in addition, sentence himto dismissal with disgrace from the DefenceForces or dismissal from the Defence Forces.
(b) Where an officer is sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of six months or less (other thanunder section 208(2)), the military judge may,in addition, sentence him to dismissal with dis-grace from the Defence Forces or dismissalfrom the Defence Forces or reduction to anylower commissioned rank.”,
(c) by substituting the following for subsection (6A) (inserted
by the Defence (Amendment) Act 1987):
“(6A) An officer sentenced by a court-martial to
reduction in rank may, in addition, be sentenced to—
(a) reduction to any lower point on the scale of pay
for that rank and forfeiture of a specified termof seniority or all seniority in respect of therank to which the officer is sentenced to bereduced, or
(b) to a fine or severe reprimand or reprimand,
or both.”,
(d) by substituting the following for subsection (7):
65Pt.3 S.57Pt.3 S.57
Amendment of
section 210 ofPrincipal Act(punishments whichmay be awarded tomen by courts-martial).
66[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
“(7) An officer sentenced by a court-martial to forfeit-
ure of seniority of rank may, in addition, be sentenced toreduction to any lower point on the scale of pay for therank held, or to a fine or severe reprimand or reprimand.”,
(e) by inserting the following after subsection (7):
“(7A) An officer sentenced by a court-martial to
reduction to a lower point on the scale of pay for the rankheld may, in addition, be sentenced to a fine or severereprimand or reprimand.”,
and
(f) in subsection (8), by substituting “disgrace” for
“ignominy”.
58.—Section 210 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) Subject to section 192, punishments may be
awarded in respect of offences against military law com-mitted by persons subject to military law as men and con-victed by court-martial according to the following scale:
SCALE.
A. Imprisonment for life or any specified period.B. Discharge with disgrace from the Defence Forces.
C. Discharge from the Defence Forces.D. Detention—
(a) in the case of a general court-martial or limited
court-martial, for any term not exceeding twoyears,
(b) in the case of a summary court-martial, for any
term not exceeding six months,
with or without forfeiture of all pay or any part thereof.E. Where the person convicted is a non-commissioned
officer, reduction to any lower non-commissionedrank.
F. Forfeiture of all seniority of rank or of a specified term
of seniority.
G. Reduction to any lower point on the scale of pay for
the rank held.
H. (a) In the case of a person subject to military law as a
man under section 119( a)o r( b) ,af i n eo fa n
amount not exceeding fourteen days’ pay of theperson at the most recent rate payable.
(b) In the case of a person subject to military law as a
man under section 119( c)o r( d), a fine not[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
exceeding the maximum fine awardable for the
time being by a court-martial to a man holdingthe rank of private of the highest grade who is inreceipt of the maximum pay applicable to thatrank.
(c) In the case of a person who is not a member of the
Defence Forces but who was a non-com-missioned officer, private or seaman when theoffence was committed, a fine not exceeding anamount equal to fourteen days’ pay at the mostrecent rate applicable to his former rank.
I. Severe reprimand.J. Reprimand.”,
(b) by deleting subsection (5),
(c) by substituting the following for subsection (6):
“(6) Where a man is sentenced to a term of imprison-
ment exceeding six months, the military judge shall, inaddition, sentence him to discharge with disgrace from theDefence Forces or discharge from the Defence Forces.”,
(d) by substituting the following for subsection (7):
“(7) Where a man is sentenced to a term of imprison-
ment of six months or less (other than under section208(2)), the military judge may, in addition, sentence himto discharge with disgrace from the Defence Forces or dis-charge from the Defence Forces.”,
(e) by substituting the following for subsection (8):
“(8) A non-commissioned officer sentenced by a court-
martial to a punishment mentioned at F or G in the Scaleto subsection (1) of this section may, in addition, be sen-tenced to a fine or severe reprimand or reprimand.”,
(f) by inserting the following after subsection (8):
“(8A) A non-commissioned officer sentenced by a
court-martial to reduction in rank may, in addition, be sen-tenced to—
(a) reduction to any lower point on the scale of pay
for that rank and forfeiture of a specified termof seniority or all seniority in respect of therank to which he is sentenced to be reduced, or
(b) to a fine or severe reprimand or reprimand,
or both.”,
and
(g) in subsection (11), by substituting “disgrace” for
“ignominy”.
67Pt.3 S.58Pt.3
Amendment of
section 211 ofPrincipal Act (onesentence to beawarded in respectof all offences).
Insertion of new
section: restrictionon sentence ofimprisonment ordetention on personw h oi sn o trepresented.
Insertion of new
section: suspensionof custodialsentences.
68[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
59.—The following section is substituted for section 211 of the
Principal Act:
“Separate
sentence foreach offence.211.—(1) Where a person is convicted by a
court-martial of two or more offences, a separatesentence shall be awarded in respect of eachoffence.
(2) Subject to section 212A, where a person is
convicted by a court-martial in respect of two ormore offences, any custodial sentences awarded inrespect of each such offence shall be served con-currently.”.
60.—The following section is inserted after section 211 of the Prin-
cipal Act:
“Restriction
on sentence ofimprisonmentor detentionon person whois notrepresented.211A.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) of this
section, a person convicted by a court-martial ofan offence against military law shall not be sen-tenced to imprisonment or dismissal or dischargewith disgrace from the Defence Forces or dis-missal or discharge from the Defence Forceswhere the person has not been represented bycounsel (within the meaning of section 196) atsome time after he is found guilty and before heis sentenced.
(2) Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply
where the person—
(a) pursuant to rules of procedure, having
been informed of his right to be rep-resented by counsel and having had theopportunity to arrange such represen-tation, refused or failed to do so, or
(b) has previously been sentenced to
imprisonment for an offence under thisAct or by a civil court in the State.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)( b)o f
this section—
(a) a previous sentence of imprisonment
which has been suspended and has nottaken effect is to be disregarded,
(b) ‘sentenced to imprisonment’ does not
include a committal for contempt ofcourt under section 208.”.
61.—The following section is inserted after section 212 of the Prin-
cipal Act:
“Power to
suspendsentence.212A.—(1) In this section—
‘governor’ includes, in relation to a military pris-
oner or a person undergoing detention, a personfor the time being performing the functions ofgovernor;[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
‘imprisonment’ includes—
(a) detention in a military prison or deten-
tion barrack or in other service custodyor in a public prison, as referred to in
section 229 of this Act,
(b) detention in Saint Patrick’s Institution,
(c) detention in a place provided under
section 2 of the Prisons Act 1970, and
(d) detention in a place specified under
section 3 of the Prisons Act 1972,
and ‘sentence of imprisonment’ shall be con-
strued accordingly;
‘mandatory term of imprisonment’ includes, in
relation to an offence, a term of imprisonmentawarded by a court-martial under this Act or anyother enactment where provision is made that aperson who is guilty of the offence concerned shallbe liable to a term of imprisonment of not lessthan such term as is specified in this Act or thatenactment.
(2) Where a person is sentenced by a court-
martial in respect of an offence to a term ofimprisonment (other than a mandatory term ofimprisonment) or to detention, the military judgepresiding at the court-martial may make an ordersuspending the execution of the sentence in wholeor in part, subject to the person entering into arecognisance to comply with the conditions of, orimposed in relation to, the order.
(3) It shall be a condition of an order under
subsection (2) of this section that the person inrespect of whom the order is made keep the peaceand be of good behaviour during—
(a) the period of suspension of the sentence
concerned, or
(b) in the case of an order that suspends a
sentence in part only, the period ofimprisonment or detention and theperiod of suspension of the sentenceconcerned,
and that condition shall be specified in the order
concerned.
(4) The military judge may, when making an
order under subsection (2) of this section, imposesuch conditions in relation to the order as heconsiders—
(a) appropriate having regard to the nature
of the offence, and
69Pt.3 S.61Pt.3 S.61
70[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) will reduce the likelihood of the person
in respect of whom the order is madecommitting any other offence,
and any condition imposed in accordance with this
subsection shall be specified in that order.
(5) In addition to any condition imposed under
subsection (4) of this section, the military judgemay, when making an order under subsection (2)of this section consisting of the suspension in partof a sentence of imprisonment or detention,impose any one or more of the following con-ditions in relation to that order:
(a) that the person cooperate with such sup-
port services, and to such extent, asmay be specified by the military judge;
(b) that the person undergo such—
(i) treatment for addiction,
(ii) course of education, training or
therapy,
(iii) psychological counselling or other
treatment,
as may be approved by the military
judge.
(6) A condition imposed under subsection (5)
of this section shall be specified in the orderconcerned.
(7) Where an order is made under subsection
(2) of this section, a copy of the order shall begiven by the Court-Martial Administrator—
(a) to the commanding officer of the person
to whom the order applies and theProvost Marshal, or
(b) in the case of an order consisting of the
suspension of a sentence of imprison-ment or detention in part only, to thepersons referred to in paragraph ( a)o f
this subsection, to the governor of theprison or detention barrack to whichthe person is committed and to suchother person, authority or supportservices as the military judge maydirect having regard to the conditions(if any) imposed under subsection (5)of this section.
(8) ( a) Where a person to whom an order
under subsection (2) of this sectionapplies is, during the period of suspen-sion of the sentence concerned, con-victed by a court-martial of an offence,the military judge presiding at the[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
court-martial before which pro-
ceedings for the offence were broughtshall, after imposing sentence for thatoffence, remand the person in custodyor otherwise to appear before a court-martial of the same class as that whichmade the order.
(b) Where a person is remanded pursuant
to paragraph ( a) of this subsection, the
Court-Martial Administrator shall,subject to the directions of theDirector—
(i) refer the matter to the summary
court-martial, or
(ii) convene a general court-martial or
limited court-martial, as specifiedin the direction, but without acourt-martial board,
to deal with the matter.
(9) ( a) A summary court-martial or the military
judge presiding at a general court-mar-tial or limited court-martial, as the casemay be, to which a person is remandedunder subsection (8) of this sectionshall revoke the order unless themilitary judge considers that revo-cation of that order would be unjust inall the circumstances of the case.
(b) Where the military judge revokes that
order, the person shall be required toserve the entire of the sentence ofimprisonment or detention originallyawarded, or such part of the sentenceas the military judge considers just hav-ing regard to all the circumstances ofthe case, less any period of that sen-tence already served and any periodspent in custody (other than a periodduring which the person was serving asentence of imprisonment or detentionin respect of an offence referred to insubsection (8) of this section) pendingrevocation of the said order.
(10) Notwithstanding the provisions of section
211 or of any other section of this Act, a sentence(other than a sentence consisting of imprisonmentfor life) awarded—
(a) in respect of an offence committed by a
person to whom an order under sub-section (2) of this section applies, and
(b) during the period of suspension of sen-
tence to which that order applies,
71Pt.3 S.61Pt.3 S.61
72[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
shall not commence until the expiration of any
period of imprisonment or detention that the per-son is required to serve of the sentence referredto in paragraph ( b) of this subsection either by vir-
tue of the order under subsection (2) or a revo-cation under subsection (9) of this section.
(11) Where the Provost Marshal or, as the case
may be, the governor of the prison or detentionbarrack to which a person was committed hasreasonable grounds for believing that a person towhom an order under this section applies has con-travened a condition referred to in the order heshall refer the matter to the Director who may—
(a) subject to the court-martial being of the
same class as that which made theorder, direct the Court-Martial Admin-istrator to—
(i) refer the matter to the summary
court-martial, or
(ii) convene a general court-martial or
limited court-martial, as specifiedin his direction, but without acourt-martial board,
and
(b) apply in the prescribed manner to that
court-martial to fix a date for the hear-ing of an application for an orderrevoking the order under subsection(2) of this section.
(12) Where a date for the hearing of an appli-
cation referred to in subsection (11) of this sectionis fixed, the person in respect of whom the appli-cation will be made, or where that person is inprison or a detention barrack, the governor of theprison or detention barrack, shall be notified inwriting in the prescribed manner, and the noticeshall require the person to attend at the hearing,or require the said governor to produce the personbefore the court-martial, on the date and at thetime specified in the notice.
(13) A notice under subsection (12) of this
section shall be addressed to the person concernedby name, and may be given to the person in theprescribed manner.
(14) If a person who is not in prison or a deten-
tion barrack fails to appear before the court-mar-tial in accordance with a requirement contained ina notice under subsection (12) of this section, themilitary judge presiding at the court-martial con-cerned may make an order for the arrest of theperson.
(15) The military judge presiding at the court-
martial shall, where he is satisfied that a person to[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
whom an order under subsection (1) of this section
applies has contravened a condition of the order,revoke the order unless he considers that revo-cation of that order would be unjust in all of thecircumstances of the case, and where the militaryjudge revokes that order, the person shall berequired to serve the entire of the sentence orig-inally awarded, or such part of the sentence as themilitary judge considers just having regard to allof the circumstances of the case, less any periodof that sentence already served in prison or in adetention barrack and any period spent in custodypending the revocation of the order.
(16) The revocation of an order under subsec-
tion (9) or (15) of this section shall for the pur-poses of this Act and the Courts-Martial AppealsAct 1983 be deemed to be a sentence of a court-martial.”.
62.—The following section is inserted after section 212A (inserted
bysection 61 ) of the Principal Act:
“Review of
certainsentences.212B.—(1) If it appears to the Director that a
sentence awarded by a court-martial, on convic-tion of a person for an offence in respect of whichpunishment for a term of imprisonment of twoyears or for any longer period is awardable by thecourt-martial, is unduly lenient, the Director mayapply to the Courts-Martial Appeal Court toreview the sentence in accordance with section22B (inserted by the Defence (Amendment) Act
2007 ) of the Courts-Martial Appeals Act 1983 and
rules of court made under that Act.
(2) Section 161(2)( ea) (which prohibits certain
communications in relation to proceedings beforea service tribunal) shall apply, with any necessarymodifications, to communications made to thepersons mentioned in that section for the purposeof influencing the making of a decision in relationto an application under this section as it appliesto those communications made for the purposesspecified in that provision.”.
63.—The following section is substituted for section 213 of the
Principal Act:
“Order for
payment ofcompensation.213.—(1) Where—
(a) a person subject to military law is con-
victed by a court-martial of an offenceagainst military law, and
(b) the offence occasioned any personal
injury, expense or loss or destructionof, or damage to, any property,
the military judge presiding at the court-martial
may, instead of or in addition to any other punish-ment which he is authorised by this Act to award
73Pt.3 S.61
Insertion of new
section: review ofcertain sentences.
Amendment of
section 213 ofPrincipal Act (orderby court-martial forpayment ofcompensation).Pt.3 S.63
74[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
in respect of the offence, order that there shall be
paid by the person convicted compensation for thepersonal injury, expense, loss, damage or destruc-tion so occasioned to any person (in this Actreferred to as the ‘injured party’) who has sufferedsuch personal injury, expense, loss, damage ordestruction.
(2) The compensation payable under this
section shall be of such amount as the militaryjudge considers appropriate, having regard to anyevidence and to any representations that are madeby or on behalf of the convicted person, theinjured party or the Director and, subject to therelevant maximum amounts specified in subsec-tion (3) of this section, shall not exceed theamount of the damages that, in the opinion of themilitary judge, the injured party would be entitledto recover in a civil action against the convictedperson in respect of the injury, expense, loss,damage or destruction concerned.
(3) In this section ‘relevant maximum amount’
means—
(a) in the case of a compensation order
made by a summary court-martial,\10,000,
(b) in the case of a compensation order
made by the military judge presiding ata limited court-martial, \20,000,
(c) in the case of a compensation order
made by the military judge presiding ata general court-martial, \100,000.
(4) Where the commission of the offence by the
convicted person involved the taking of propertyout of the possession of the injured party and theproperty has been recovered, any loss occurring tothe injured party by reason of the property beingdamaged while out of his possession shall betreated for the purposes of subsection (1) of thissection as having resulted from the offence, irres-pective of how the damage was caused or whocaused it.
(5) In determining whether to make an order
under this section against a person, and in
determining the amount of the compensation, themilitary judge shall have regard to the person’smeans so far as they appear or are known to themilitary judge and for that purpose the militaryjudge may require the convicted person to giveevidence as to his means and financial com-mitments.
(6) An order under this section may provide for
payment of the compensation by such instalmentsand at such times as the military judge considersreasonable in all the circumstances.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(7) Where the military judge considers that—
(a) it would be appropriate both to award a
fine under section 209 or 210, as thecase may be, and to make an orderunder this section, but
(b) the convicted person has insufficient
means to pay both an appropriate fineand appropriate compensation,
the military judge may, if he is satisfied that the
means are sufficient to justify doing so, make anorder under this section and if he is satisfied thatit is appropriate to do so having regard to themeans that would remain after compliance withthe order, award a fine.
(8) This section is without prejudice to any
other enactment which provides for the paymentof compensation by a person convicted of anoffence or otherwise proved to have committedan offence.
(9) For the purposes of this section—
(a) in a case where death has resulted from
an offence specified in subsection (1)of this section—
‘loss’ means any matter (including
mental distress resulting from thedeath and funeral expenses) for whichdamages could be awarded in respectof the death by virtue of Part V of theCivil Liability Act 1961;
‘injured party’ includes a dependant
(within the meaning of the said Part V)of the deceased person concerned,
(b) in a case where service property is the
subject of an order under this section,‘injured party’ includes the Minister.
(10) An order under this section shall, for the
purposes of this Act and the Courts-MartialAppeals Act 1983, be deemed to be a sentence ofa court-martial.”.
64.—The following section is inserted after section 213 of the Prin-
cipal Act:
“Payment of
fine.213A.—(1) Where a person subject to military
law is convicted by a court-martial and is sen-tenced to a fine, the fine shall be a stated amount.
(2) The terms of payment of a fine referred to
in subsection (1) of this section are, subject to theprovisions of this Act, at the discretion of themilitary judge who awards the fine.”.
75Pt.3 S.63
Insertion of new
section: payment offine.Pt.3
Amendment of
section 225 ofPrincipal Act(restitution ofstolen property).
76[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Chapter 6
Action on Findings and Sentences of Courts-martial
65.—The following section is substituted for section 225 of the
Principal Act:
“Orders for
restitution.225.—(1) Where a person is convicted by a
court-martial of an offence under section 155 or156, the military judge may on the conviction(whether or not the passing of sentence is in otherrespects deferred)—
(a) order anyone having possession or con-
trol of the property which is the subjectof the offence to restore it to any per-son entitled to recover it from the con-victed person,
(b) on the application of a person entitled
to recover from the convicted personany other property directly orindirectly representing the propertyreferred to in paragraph ( a) of this sub-
section (as being the proceeds of anydisposal or realisation of the whole orpart of it or of property so representingit), order that other property to bedelivered or transferred to the appli-cant, or
(c) order that a sum not exceeding the
value of the property referred to inparagraph ( a) of this subsection shall
be paid, out of any money of the con-victed person which was taken out ofhis possession when arrested, to anyperson who, if the property were in thepossession of the convicted person,would be entitled to recover that prop-erty from him.
(2) Where the military judge has power on a
person’s conviction to make an order against theperson under both paragraphs ( b) and ( c) of sub-
section (1) of this section, the military judge maymake orders under both paragraphs, if the personin whose favour the orders are made does notthereby recover more than the value of the prop-erty which is the subject of the offence concerned.
(3) Where—
(a) an order is made under subsection
(1)(a) of this section for the restoration
of any property, and
(b) it appears to the military judge that the
convicted person has sold the propertyto a person acting in good faith or has[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
borrowed money on the security of it
from a person so acting,
then, on the application of the purchaser or lender,
the military judge may order that there shall bepaid to the applicant, out of any money of the con-victed person which was taken out of his pos-session when arrested, a sum not exceeding theamount paid for the purchase by the applicant or,as the case may be, the amount owed to the appli-cant in respect of the loan.
(4) ( a) The military judge shall not exercise the
powers conferred by this section unlessin his opinion the relevant factssufficiently appear from evidencegiven at the trial or the available docu-ments, together with admissions madeby or on behalf of any person in con-nection with any proposed exercise ofthe powers.
(b) In paragraph ( a) of this subsection
‘available documents’ means—
(i) any written statements or admis-
sions which were made for use,and would have been admissiblein evidence, at the trial, and
(ii) any written statements or admis-
sions used as evidence at the trialor in any such proceedings.
(5) This section shall have effect only in
relation to offences wholly or partly committed onor after the commencement of this section.
(6) This section is without prejudice to the
Police (Property) Act 1897 (disposal of propertyin the possession of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na).”.
66.—The following section is substituted for section 226 of the
Principal Act:
“Proceedings
of court-martial.226.—(1) The proceedings of a court-martial
shall be preserved in the prescribed manner.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the pro-
ceedings of a court-martial include exhibits.”.
Chapter 7
Execution of Sentences
67.—Section 229 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by substituting “Subject to section 212A,
where a sentence of imprisonment is passed by a court-martial,” for “Where a sentence of imprisonment ispassed by a court-martial and confirmed,”,
77Pt.3 S.65
Amendment of
section 226 ofPrincipal Act (rightto copy ofproceedings ofcourt-martial).
Amendment of
section 229 ofPrincipal Act(execution ofsentence ofimprisonment ordetention).Pt.3 S.67
Amendment of
section 231 ofPrincipal Act (dutyof governor ofprison to receiveprisoners).
Amendment of
section 233 ofPrincipal Act(regulation ofmilitary prisons anddetention barracks).
Amendment of
section 240 ofPrincipal Act (rulesof procedure).
78[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(b) in subsection (2), by substituting “Subject to section 212A,
where a sentence of detention is passed by a court-mar-tial,” for “Where a sentence of detention is passed by acourt-martial and confirmed, or is passed by a command-ing officer,”, and
(c) in subsection (3), by substituting “Subject to section 212A,
a military prisoner” for “A military prisoner”.
68.—Section 231 of the Principal Act is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by substituting “military prisoners” for
“prisoners”, and
(b) by substituting the following for subsection (2):
“(2) The governor of every prison shall also receive
into his custody any person subject to military law inservice custody upon delivery to the governor of a writtenorder, purporting to be signed by the commanding officerof that person, for any period not exceeding 8 days (whichshall not include the day on which the order is made), orany further such order or orders so made for any furthersuch period or periods.”.
69.—Section 233 of the Principal Act is amended by substituting
the following for subsection (2A) (inserted by the Criminal JusticeAct 1990):
“(2A) Any power conferred by rules under this section to
release a person temporarily shall not, in the case of a personserving a sentence passed on him on conviction of treason or ofmurder, or attempted murder, to which section 3 of the CriminalJustice Act 1990 applies, be exercisable before the expiration ofthe minimum period specified by the court-martial under section4 of that Act, as applied by section 169A of this Act, less anyreduction of that period by the amount of remission earned bythe person according to the rules of practice whereby prisonersgenerally earn remission of sentence by industry and good con-duct, unless for grave reasons of a humanitarian nature, and anysuch release shall only be of such limited duration as is justifiedby those reasons.”.
Chapter 8
Rules of Procedure and Court-martial Rules
70.—Section 240 of the Principal Act is amended by substituting
the following for subsection (1):
“(1) The Minister may make rules (in this Act referred to as
‘rules of procedure’) in relation to all or any of the followingmatters:
(a) the assembly and procedure of courts of inquiry and
boards;
(b) the form of oath to be taken by the military judge
before entering upon his duties under this Act;[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(c) in the case of a person remanded for trial by court-
martial, the procedures (other than procedures of acourt-martial which are the subject of court-martialrules) to be followed in bringing the person to trial,including the taking of a written summary of evi-dence in the case;
(d) the functions of the Court-Martial Administrator
relating to the management and control generally ofthe administration and business of courts-martial;
(e) the procedure for convening courts-martial;
(f) the procedure for the dissolution by the Court-Martial
Administrator of a general court-martial or limitedcourt-martial;
(g) the procedure for referring matters to the summary
court-martial;
(h) the procedure for selecting members of a court-mar-
tial board;
(i) the procedure in relation to representation for the
purposes of section 211A;
(j) the promulgation of the findings and sentence of a
court-martial;
(k) the carrying into effect of sentences of courts-martial;
(l) the carrying into effect of decisions made and punish-
ments awarded by the summary court-martial undersection 178G;
(m) the form of notice and the giving of such notice under
section 212A(12);
(n) the retention and preservation of records of pro-
ceedings of a court-martial;
(o) the supply of copies of such records, including pro-
vision in respect of any fee payable for the supplyof copies;
(p) the officers who are to be prescribed officers for the
purposes of section 121;
(q) the functions of the Chief Military Judge (if any);
(r) the judicial functions, other than those with respect to
courts-martial, which may be performed by amilitary judge;
(s) any other matter or thing referred to in this Part
(other than Chapters IV and X and any matter orthing referred to in this Part as prescribed by court-martial rules) as prescribed;
(t) any other matter which the Minister considers neces-
sary or expedient for the proper administration ofthis Part (other than Chapters IV and X and any
79Pt.3 S.70Pt.3 S.70
Insertion of new
sections: Courts-Martial RulesCommittee, etc.
80[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
matter referred to in this Part as the subject of court-
martial rules).”.
71.—(1) The following sections are inserted after section 240 but
in Chapter IX of the Principal Act:
“Courts-
Martial RulesCommittee.240A.—(1) There is hereby established a com-
mittee to be known as Coiste Rialacha na nArm-chu´irteanna or in the English language as the
Courts-Martial Rules Committee (in this Chapterreferred to as the ‘Committee’).
(2) The functions of the Committee shall be,
with the concurrence of the Minister, to makerules of court (in this Act referred to as ‘court-martial rules’) in accordance with section 240B.
(3) The Committee shall consist of two ex-
officio members and six nominated members.
(4) The ex-officio members of the Committee
shall be—
(a) the Judge Advocate-General, and
(b) the military judge or, where there is
more than one, the Chief MilitaryJudge, who shall be the deputy chair-person of the Committee.
(5) The nominated members of the Committee
shall be—
(a) a judge of the Circuit Court nominated
by the President of the Circuit Court,who shall be the chairperson of theCommittee,
(b) a practising barrister nominated by the
General Council of the Bar of Ireland,
(c) a practising solicitor nominated by the
Law Society of Ireland,
(d) an officer of the Attorney General,
nominated by the Attorney General,
(e) an officer of the Department of
Defence, not below the rank of princi-pal officer, nominated by the Mini-ster, and
(f) an officer of the Permanent Defence
Force, not below the rank of comman-dant, nominated by the Chief of Staff,who shall act as secretary to theCommittee.
(6) Every nominated member of the Commit-
tee shall, unless that member sooner dies, resignsor ceases to be, as the case may be, a judge of theCircuit Court, a practising barrister, a practising[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
solicitor or an officer referred to in subsection
(5)(d)t o( f) of this section, hold office as such
member for five years from the date ofnomination.
(7) A nominated member of the Committee
whose membership expires with the passage oftime shall be eligible for renomination.
(8) Subject to subsection (9) of this section, the
Committee may act notwithstanding one or morevacancies in its membership.
(9) The quorum for a meeting of the Commit-
tee shall be four.
(10) The chairperson of the Committee shall
preside at all meetings of the Committee at whichhe is present and in the absence of the chairpersonthe deputy chairperson shall preside at themeeting.
(11) Subject to subsection (12) of this section,
the Committee shall hold such and so many meet-ings as may be necessary for the performance ofits functions but in any case shall meet not lessfrequently than once in each year.
(12) The first meeting of the Committee shall
be held within one month after the commence-ment of this section.
(13) Subject to this Act, the Committee shall
regulate the practice and procedure of theCommittee.
Court-martial
rules.240B.—(1) The Committee may, with the con-
currence of the Minister, make court-martial rulesfor the purpose of regulating the pleading, practiceand procedure generally in all proceedings beforecourts-martial under this Part of this Act, includ-ing rules in relation to all or any of the matters setout in the Twelfth Schedule to this Act.
(2) Court-martial rules shall be deemed to be a
statutory instrument to which the Statutory Instru-ments Act 1947 primarily applies.”.
(2) The Schedule set out in Schedule 7 is inserted after the Elev-
enth Schedule (inserted by section 20 ) to the Principal Act.
SCHEDULE 1
Saving and Transitional Provisions
Offences committed before commencement of this Act.
1. In the case of an offence committed before the commencement
of this Act, the amendments made to the Principal Act by this Actshall not be exercised so as to allow the imposition in respect of the
81Pt.3 S.71
Section 3.Sch. 1
82[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
offence of a punishment more severe than that which was applicable
when that offence was committed.
Person remanded for trial by court-martial.
2. Without prejudice to section 26(2)( c) of the Interpretation Act
2005, where, before the commencement of this Act, a person hasbeen remanded for trial by court-martial or re-trial (in a case wherea re-trial has been ordered by the Courts-Martial Appeal Court) anda court-martial has not yet been convened in accordance with thePrincipal Act, then, subject to the directions of the Director, theperson may, subject to paragraph 1 , be tried and punished in like
manner as if the person had been remanded for trial or re-trial afterthe commencement of this Act.
Election for trial by court-martial.
3. (1) Where before the commencement of Chapter 3 ofPart 3 —
(a) a charge is being dealt with summarily under section 177
or 178, as the case may be, and
(b) the person charged has not yet been asked in accordance
with that section, as appropriate, whether the personelects to have the charge disposed of summarily or to be
tried by court-martial,
then, section 177B or 178B, as the case may be, of the Principal Act
shall have effect as if that section required the authorised officer orcommanding officer, as appropriate, to afford the person charged theopportunity of electing for trial by court-martial in relation to thecharge before continuing to dispose of it summarily.
(2) Any election for trial by court-martial made before the com-
mencement of Chapter 3 ofPart 3 shall be treated on or after that
date as if made under section 177B or 178B of the Principal Act,as appropriate.
Appeals to summary court-martial.
4. (1) Sections 178E, 178F and 178G of the Principal Act shall
only apply to determinations made, punishments awarded and com-pensation orders made after the coming into operation of Chapter 3
ofPart 3 .
(2) Sections 179D and 179E of the Principal Act shall only apply
to determinations made, punishments awarded and compensationorders made after the coming into operation of Chapter 3 ofPart 3 .
Application of section 180 of Principal Act.
5. The repeal of section 180 of the Principal Act by section 4 shall
not affect the application of that section to punishments awardedunder Chapter IV of Part V of that Act before the commencementofChapter 3 ofPart 3.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments to Principal Act
Provision affected Amendment
(1) (2)
Section 50 Insert the following subsection after subsection (3):
“(4) This section shall not apply to a military judge.”.
Section 81(1)( c) Substitute “disgrace” for “ignominy”.
Section 126(2) ( a) In paragraph ( a), substitute “under the influence of
an intoxicant” for “drunk”.
(b) In subparagraph (ii), substitute “disgrace” for
“ignominy”.
Section 139 Substitute “disgrace” for “ignominy”.
Section 152 Substitute “service aircraft or service aircraft material” for
“an aircraft or aircraft material”.
Section 159 ( a) In subsection (1)( c), substitute “under the influence
of an intoxicant” for “drunk”.
(b) Substitute the following for subsection (2):
“(2) For the purposes of paragraph ( c) of subsection
(1) of this section a person shall be deemed to havebeen under the influence of an intoxicant whiledriving or attempting to drive a service vehicle if—
(a) the officer investigating the charge under
Chapter IV of this Part, or
(b) the summary court-martial or, in the case of a
general court-martial or limited court-mar-tial, the court-martial board,
is satisfied that such person was, by reason of the taking
by him of an intoxicant, in such a condition that he wasincapable of exercising effective control of such vehiclewhile in motion.”.
Section 169(3)( g) Substitute “disgrace” for “ignominy”.
Section 175(1)( b)(iii) Delete “and the finding has been confirmed”.
Section 183(2) Substitute “ \2,000” for “£100”.
Section 196 ( a) In subsection (4), substitute “military judge” for “pre-
sident of the court-martial”.
(b) In subsection (5), substitute “military judge” for “pre-
sident” in each place where it occurs.
Section 200(1) Delete “president or other”.
Section 204 Delete “shall not require confirmation or be subject to
revision and”.
Section 206(2)( a) Substitute “disgrace” for “ignominy”.
and ( c)
Section 239(2) ( a) Insert “or air” after “sea” in each place where it
occurs.
(b) Insert “or aircraft” after “ship” in each place where
it occurs.
Section 242(1) Substitute “ \2,000” for “£250”.
Section 243(2)( b) Substitute “ \2,000” for “£250”.
Section 244 Substitute “shall be evidence, until the contrary is shown,”
for “shall be conclusive evidence”.
Section 245 Substitute “ \2,000” for “£250”.
83Section 4.Sch. 2
Section 10.
84[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision affected Amendment
(1) (2)
Section 248 ( a) Insert “or, where relevant, in proceedings under
Chapter IV of this Part” after “civil court”.
(b) In paragraphs ( e) and ( f), substitute “(whether printed
or made available by electronic means or otherwisein non-legible form which is capable of being repro-duced in permanent legible form)” for “(whetherprinted or cyclostyled)” in each place where itoccurs.
Section 249(2) Substitute “a member of the Reserve Defence Force” for
“a man of the Reserve Defence Force”.
Section 250 ( a) In subsection (1), substitute “military judge” for “pre-
sident thereof”.
(b) In subsection (2), delete “and the action of the con-
firming authority thereon”.
SCHEDULE 3
References to Ignominy in certain Act and Instruments
PART 1
Act Provision affected Amendment
(1) (2) (3)
Superannuation Act Section 3 (as In subsection (2)( b)(i)(I), substi-
1887 amended by the Civil tute “disgrace” for “ignominy”.
Service Superannu-ation Regulations1980 (S.I. No. 188 of1980))
PART 2
Instrument Provision affected Amendment
(1) (2) (3)
Local Government Articles Substitute “disgrace” for “ignom-(Superannuation) 9(1)( j)(I)(A), iny” in each place where it occurs.
(Consolidation) 33(1)( h)(I)(A),
Scheme 1998 (S.I. 63(1)( j)(I)(A) and
No. 455 of 1998) 88(1)( h)(I)(A)
Rules of Procedure Rule 63(1) (as In paragraphs ( a) and ( d) substi-
(Defence Forces) amended by the tute “disgrace” for “ignominy” in1954 (S.I. No. 243 Rules of Procedure each place where it occurs.of 1954) (Defence Forces)
1987 (S.I. No. 245 of1987))
Secondary Teachers’ Paragraph 11(2)( a)(i) Substitute “disgrace” for “ignom-
Superannuation and ( b)(i) iny” in each place where it occurs.
(Amendment)Scheme 1954 (S.I.No. 234 of 1954)[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Instrument Provision affected Amendment
(1) (2) (3)
National School Paragraph 5(6)( a)(i) Substitute “disgrace” for “ignom-
Teachers’ Superan- and ( b)(i) iny” in each place where it occurs.
nuation(Amendment)Scheme 1947 (S.I.No. 330 of 1947)
SCHEDULE 4
Miscellaneous Amendments to other Acts
PART 1
Amendments to Courts-Martial Appeals Act 1983
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
Section 13 ( a) Delete “(when confirmed)”.
(b) Renumber the existing provision as subsection (1) of that
section.
(c) Insert the following subsection:
“(2) A person in respect of whom a finding or order of
committal is made under section 202 or 203 of the Actof 1954 may appeal that finding or order of committal tothe Court.”.
Section 17 ( a) In subsection (1), substitute “military judge presiding at the
court-martial” for “president or the judge-advocate of thecourt-martial”.
(b) Delete subsection (2).
Section 19 Insert “(other than an appeal under sections 203B to 203D
(inserted by the Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 )o ft h eA c to f
1954)” after “If on any appeal”.
New sections Insert the following sections after section 19:
“Appeals (mental disorder at time of trial).
19A.—Where an appeal is made to the Court under section
203B (inserted by the Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 ) of the Act
of 1954 from a finding by a court-martial pursuant to section 202of that Act, the Court shall, if it allows the appeal, order that theappellant be tried or retried, as the case may be, by court-martialfor the offence alleged.
Appeals (mental disorder at time of commission of offence).
19B.—(1) A person tried for an offence by court-martial and
found not guilty by reason of insanity may appeal to the Courtagainst the finding on all or any of the following grounds:
(a) that it was not proved that the person did the act or made
the omission in question;
(b) that the person was not, at the time when he did the act or
made the omission, suffering from a mental disorder of thenature referred to in section 203(1) of the Act of 1954;
(c) that the military judge ought to have made a finding in
respect of the person that he was unfit to take his trial.
85Sch. 3
Section 11 .Sch. 4
86[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
(2) If on an appeal to the Court on the ground referred to in
subsection (1)( a) of this section, the Court is satisfied that it was
not established that the appellant did the act or made the omissionin question it shall order that the appellant be acquitted.
(3) If, on an appeal to the Court on the ground referred to in
subsection (1)( b) of this section, the Court is satisfied that the
appellant did the act or made the omission alleged but having con-sidered the evidence or any new evidence relating to the mentalcondition of the appellant given by a consultant psychiatrist issatisfied that he was not suffering from a mental disorder of thenature referred to in section 203(1) of the Act of 1954, the Courtshall substitute a verdict of guilty of the offence charged or of anyother offence of which it is satisfied that the person could (byvirtue of the charge) and ought to have been convicted, and shallhave the like powers of punishing or otherwise dealing with theperson as the court-martial concerned would have had if the per-son had been convicted of the offence in respect of which theverdict of guilty has been so substituted.
(4) If, on appeal to the Court on the ground set out at subsec-
tion (1)( c) of this section, the Court is satisfied that the appellant
ought to have been found unfit to take his trial it shall make afinding to that effect and, in that case the provisions of section202(1)( b) of the Act of 1954 shall apply.
(5) If on appeal to the Court, the Court is satisfied, having con-
sidered the evidence or any new evidence relating to the mentalcondition of the appellant, that he was at the time that the offencealleged was committed suffering from a mental disorder of thenature referred to in section 203(1) of the Act of 1954 and thatbut for that disorder the appellant would have been found guiltyof the offence charged or of another offence of which the personcould have been found guilty by virtue of the charge, the Courtshall dismiss the appeal.
(6) In this section and in section 19C of this Act ‘consultant
psychiatrist’ has the same meaning as in the Mental Health Act2001.
Appeals (supplementary provisions).
19C.—(1) Where an appeal is made to the Court against a
decision by a court-martial to make or not to make an order ofcommittal under section 202(1)( b) or 203(2) of the Act of 1954, the
Court may, having considered the evidence or any new evidencerelating to the mental condition of the person charged given by aconsultant psychiatrist, make such order, being an order that itwas open to the court-martial to make, as it considers appropriateand, without prejudice to the provisions of section 13 of the Crimi-nal Law (Insanity) Act 2006 relating to the review of orders ofcommittal, no further appeal shall lie from an order made on anappeal under this section.
(2) Where the Court allows an appeal against a conviction or
against a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity on the groundthat the appellant ought to have been found unfit to take his trial,or allows an appeal against a conviction on the ground that theappellant ought to have been found not guilty by reason ofinsanity, it shall have the same powers to deal with the appellantas the court-martial concerned would have had under section 202or 203 of the Act of 1954 if it had come to the same conclusion.
(3) All ancillary and procedural provisions contained in a stat-
ute or an instrument made under statute relating to appealsagainst convictions, including provisions relating to leave toappeal, shall apply with the necessary modifications to appealsunder sections 19A and 19B of this Act and subsection (1) ofthis section.
(4) The powers of the Court in an appeal under section 19A or
19B of this Act or subsection (1) of this section shall include the[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
power to make any such order as may be necessary for the purpose
of doing justice in accordance with the provisions of this Act andthe Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2006.”.
Section 22 Substitute “the Director of Military Prosecutions” for “the person
who convened the court-martial by which the appellant was triedor by his successor in office duly empowered to convene courts-martial”.
New sections Insert the following sections after section 22:
“Case stated for the Court on question of law.
22A.—Where an appeal is made to the summary court-martial
under section 178E (inserted by the Defence (Amendment) Act
2007 ) of the Act of 1954, the military judge—
(a) shall, if requested by the appellant or the respondent,
unless the military judge considers the request friv-olous, and
(b) may, without request,
refer any question of law arising in that appeal to the Court for
determination in accordance with this Act.
Review of certain sentences.
22B.—(1) An application by the Director of Military Pros-
ecutions under section 212B (inserted by the Defence
(Amendment) Act 2007 ) of the Defence Act 1954 to review a sen-
tence awarded by a court-martial shall be made, on notice givento the convicted person, within 28 days or such longer period notexceeding 56 days as the Court may, on application to it in thatbehalf, determine, from the day on which the sentence wasawarded.
(2) On such an application, the Court may either—
(a) quash the sentence and in its place award to the con-
victed person the sentence it considers appropriate,being a sentence which could have been awardedto him by the court-martial concerned, or
(b) refuse the application.”.
Section 26 Substitute the following for paragraph ( b):
“(b) any of the provisions of the Act of 1954 or any instrument
made under that Act permit the accused to be representedby counsel or by a solicitor at the investigation of the chargeor the taking down of the evidence pursuant to any suchprovisions or instrument (or at both such investigation andsuch taking down of evidence),”.
Section 27 ( a) In subsection (1)—
(i) substitute the following for paragraph ( a):
“(a) a person (in this section referred to as ‘the
accused’)—
(i) is, at the direction of the Director of Military
Prosecutions, to be tried by court-martial,or
(ii) appeals to the summary court-martial pursu-
ant to section 178E (inserted by theDefence (Amendment) Act 2007 ) of the
Act of 1954,
and”,
and
87Sch. 4Sch. 4
88[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
(ii) insert “or of his appeal, as the case may be,” after
“the trial”.
(b) In subsection (2)( c)(ii)—
(i) insert “or appeal, as the case may be” after “set
up”, and
(ii) insert “or of his appeal, as the case may be” after
“trial”.
New section Insert the following section after section 27:
“Legal aid (case stated) certificate.27A.—(1) Where—
(a) a person appeals to the summary court-martial under section
178E (inserted by the Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 )o f
the Act of 1954 and the military judge before whom theappeal is heard refers a question of law arising in the pro-ceedings to the Court pursuant to section 22A of this Act,and
(b) a certificate for free legal aid (in this Part of this Act referred
to as ‘a legal aid (case stated) certificate’) is granted inrespect of the person by the prescribed authority or undersubsection (3) of this section,
the person shall be entitled to free legal aid in the preparation and
conduct of his case in relation to the case stated and to have asolicitor and counsel assigned to him for that purpose in such man-ner as may be prescribed by regulations under section 33 of thisAct.
(2) A legal aid (case stated) certificate shall be granted in
respect of the person concerned if (but only if)—
(a) application is made therefor,
(b) it appears to the prescribed authority that the means of the
person are insufficient to enable him to obtain legal aid,and
(c) it appears to the prescribed authority that, by reason of the
serious nature of the offence with which the person ischarged or of exceptional circumstances, it is essential inthe interests of justice that a legal aid (case stated) certifi-cate should be granted in respect of the person.
(3) Where, in relation to a case stated, a person is refused a
legal aid (case stated) certificate by the prescribed authority, hemay apply for the certificate to the Court either—
(a) by letter addressed to the registrar of the Court setting out
the facts of the case and the grounds of the application, or
(b) to the Court itself,
and the Court shall grant the certificate if (but only if)—
(i) it appears to the Court that the means of the person are insuf-
ficient to enable him to obtain legal aid, and
(ii) it appears to the Court that, by reason of the serious nature
of the offence with which the person is charged or of excep-tional circumstances, it is essential in the interests of justicethat a legal aid (case stated) certificate should be grantedin respect of the person.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
Section 28(1) ( a) Substitute the following for paragraph ( a):
“(a) a person (in this section referred to as ‘the
accused’)—
(i) is convicted by a court-martial, or(ii) is found to be unfit to take his trial pursuant to
section 202 of the Act of 1954, or
(iii) is found not guilty by reason of insanity pursu-
ant to section 203 of the Act of 1954,
and”.
(b) Insert “or against a decision by a court-martial to make or
not to make an order of committal under section 202(1)( b)
or section 203(2) of the Act of 1954” after “and suchsentence”.
Section 34 In subsection (1), substitute “ \2,000” for “£100”.
PART 2
Amendments to Defence (Amendment) Act 1987
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
Section 8 ( a) In subsection (1), substitute “military judge presiding at” for
“president of”.
(b) Substitute the following for subsection (3):
“(3) For the purposes of subsection (1) of this section—
(a) subsection (3) of section 207 of the Principal Act
shall apply as it applies for the purposes of thesaid section 207, and
(b) references to the military judge shall be con-
strued as including references to such officer.”.
(c) In subsection (4), substitute “ \2,000” for “£100”.
PART 3
Amendment to Criminal Evidence Act 1992
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
Section 1 In subsection (4)( b)(iii) substitute “Chapter IV of Part V” for
“section 177 or 178 (as amended by section 3 of the Defence(Amendment) Act 1987)”.
89Sch. 4Sch. 4
90[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
PART 4
Amendments to Ombudsman (Defence Forces) Act 2004
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
Section 5(1) ( a) In paragraph ( b), substitute “Chapter IV of Part V of the Act
of 1954” for “section 179”.
(b) In paragraph ( e), substitute the following for subparagraph
(i):
“(i) involving the exercise of the right or power referred
to in Article 13.6 of the Constitution or theremission of any forfeiture or punishment awardedunder Chapter IV of Part V of the Act of 1954,by a court-martial or by the Courts-Martial AppealCourt, or”.
PART 5
Amendments to Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2006
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
Section 13 ( a) Substitute the following for subsection (3)( b):
“(b) Where the clinical director of a designated centre
forms the opinion in relation to a patient detainedpursuant to section 202 of the Defence Act 1954,that the patient is no longer unfit to take his or hertrial he or she shall forthwith notify the Director ofMilitary Prosecutions (within the meaning of thatAct) of this opinion and the Director of MilitaryProsecutions may direct—
(i) that the matter be referred to the summary court-
martial or that the Court-Martial Adminis-trator convene a general court-martial or lim-ited court-martial, as specified in the direc-tion, and
(ii) that the person be brought before such court-
martial as soon as may be to be dealt with asthe court-martial considers proper.”.
(b) Substitute the following for subsection (8)( a):
“(a) if, having heard evidence relating to the mental con-
dition of the patient given by the consultant psy-chiatrist responsible for his or her care or treat-ment, the Review Board determines that he or sheis no longer unfit to be tried by reason of mentaldisorder or to participate in proceedings referredto in section 4 it shall order that the patient bebrought before the court which committed him orher to the designated centre to be dealt with as thatcourt thinks proper or in the case of a patientdetained pursuant to section 202 of the DefenceAct 1954, it shall notify the Director of MilitaryProsecutions (within the meaning of that Act) andthe Director of Military Prosecutions may direct—
(i) that the matter be referred to the summary court-
martial or that the Court-Martial Adminis-trator convene a general court-martial or lim-ited court-martial, as specified in the direc-tion, and[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2)
(ii) that the person be brought before such court-
martial as soon as may be to be dealt with asthe court-martial considers proper.”.
SCHEDULE 5
Scheduled Offences
“ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
Scheduled Offences for the Purposes of Part V of this
Act
PART I
Offences of a Disciplinary Nature Which may be Disposed
of Summarily Under Section 177C,178Co r 179C
Provision of Offence
Principal Act
(1) (2)
Section 133 Insubordinate behaviour
Section 134 Disorders
Section 137 Absence without leave
Section 138 False statement in respect of leave
Section 142 Prohibition on being under the influence of an
intoxicant
Section 160 Unauthorised use of service vehicles
Section 168 Conduct to the prejudice of good order and
discipline
PART II
Offences of a Disciplinary Nature Which may be Disposed
of Summarily Under Section 177Co r 178C Subject to Prior
Consent of Director
Provision of Offence
Principal Act
(1) (2)
Section 131 Disobedience to superior officer
Section 136 Connivance at desertion
Section 141 False accusation against officer or man
Section 144 Dilatory conduct in regard to trials
Section 145 Negligent or wilful interference with lawful
custody
91Sch. 4
Section 20 .Sch. 5
Section 21 .
Section 71 .
92[No. 24.] [2007.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Provision of Offence
Principal Act
(1) (2)
Section 147 Obstruction of officer or man carrying out
police duties
Section 150 Unauthorised carriage on ships or aircraft
Section 157 Destruction, loss or improper disposal of
property
Section 159 Negligent or furious driving of service vehicles
Section 164 Fraudulent enlistment
Section 165 General offences in relation to enlistment
Section 166 Negligent performance of duties
Section 167 Offences in relation to documents
”.
SCHEDULE 6
Amendments Consequential on Section 20
Provision of Principal Amendment
Act affected
(1) (2)
Sections 131, 133, 134, Insert “where a charge under this section is disposed of136, 137(1), 138, 141, summarily under section 177C, 178C or 179C, as the case144, 145, 147, 157, may be, be liable to suffer any punishment awardable159(1), 160, 164(1), thereunder or,” after “shall,”.165, 166, 167 and168(1).
SCHEDULE 7
Court-Martial Rules
“TWELFTH SCHEDULE
Court-Martial Rules
Matters in respect of which the Courts-Martial Rules Committee
may make court-martial rules.
1. The pleading, practice and procedure generally in all pro-
ceedings before courts-martial.
2. Assignment of cases by the Chief Military Judge (if any).3. Sittings of courts-martial, including the days, times and
place of sitting and any changes thereto.
4. Oaths and affirmations for members of the court-martial
board, witnesses and other persons and the person or personswho may administer such oaths and affirmations.[2007.] [ No. 24.] Defence (Amendment) Act 2007 .
5. Procedures for the making of objections to, and the
replacement of, members of a court-martial board.
6. Procuring the attendance of witnesses and other persons
and the production of documents and other things, includingprovision in relation to—
(a) the payment of expenses to persons summoned to
attend a court-martial,
(b) the making of orders for the arrest of persons.
7. The making of records of the proceedings of courts-
martial.
8. The order of and manner in which submissions may be
made by the Director or by or on behalf of the accused in allproceedings before a court-martial.
9. The alteration, amendment, addition and substitution of
charges.
10. Adjournment of proceedings before a court-martial.11. The procedure for the dissolution by a military judge of
a general court-martial or limited court-martial.
12. Forms of orders to be made by a military judge including
in relation to sentences of imprisonment or detention or anyother punishment which may be awarded.
13. Procedures for making application for legal aid.14. The entry into, taking of and form of recognisance for the
purposes of suspending sentences under section 212A.
15. Procedures for making application to a court-martial
under section 212A(11) to fix a date for hearing for the purposesof that provision.
16. Procedures for the making of applications for restitution
of stolen property under section 225.
17. The practice and procedure for the bringing and hearing
of appeals by, and other related proceedings before, the sum-mary court-martial.
18. The procedure for referral under section 178G(5) of ques-
tions of law arising on an appeal under section 178E to theCourts-Martial Appeal Court for determination.
19. Any other matter or thing expedient or necessary for the
purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act relat-ing to the pleading, practice and procedure generally in all pro-ceedings before courts-martial under this Act.”.
93Sch. 7