————————
Number 25of2007
————————
MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.3. Repeals and revocations.
PART 2
Continuance in being of Council and object and functions of
Council, etc.
4. Continuance in being of Council.
5. Seal of Council.6. Object of Council.7. Functions of Council.
8. Conferral of additional functions on Council.9. Ministerial directions to Council.
10. Immunity.11. Council’s power to make rules.12. Council’s power to issue guidelines.
PART 3
Statement of Strategy, Business Plan and Annual Report of
Council
13. Council to prepare and submit statement of strategy.
14. Publication and implementation of statement of strategy.
12[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
15. Council to prepare and forward business plan to Minister.
16. Council to submit annual report to Minister.
PART 4
Members, Committees and Staff of Council
17. Members of Council.
18. Elections.19. First meeting of Council under this Act.20. Committees of Council.21. Expenses of members of Council and committees.22. Payment of allowances.
23. Removal of members of Council from office.
24. Chief executive officer.25. Staff of Council.26. Age limits.27. Superannuation.28. Membership of either House of Oireachtas by member of
staff of Council.
29. Membership of local authority or European Parliament by
member of staff of Council.
30. Disclosure of interests by members of Council or committee.31. Disclosure of interests by members of staff of Council.
PART 5
Accounts and Finances of Council
32. Accounts of Council.
33. Power of Council to borrow.34. Acceptance of gifts by Council.35. Expenses of Council and Minister.36. Fees that Council may charge.
PART 6
Registration of Medical Practitioners
37. Unregistered medical practitioners shall not practise
medicine.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
38. Circumstances in which unregistered medical practitioners
may practise medicine.
39. Designated titles.40. Use of designated titles.41. Offences and penalties.42. Recovery of fees, etc.43. Register.44. Transitional provisions applicable to register.45. Registration of medical practitioners — general.46. Medical practitioners to be registered in General Division.47. Medical practitioners to be registered in Specialist Division.48. Medical practitioners to be registered in Trainee Specialist
Division.
49. Internship registration in Trainee Specialist Division.50. Visiting EEA practitioners providing services on temporary
and occasional basis.
51. Registration of additional qualifications.52. Application to have registration removed, etc.
53. Conditions attached to first registration.54. Refusal of registration, etc., and appeal to Court against
Council’s decision.
55. Correction of register.56. Publication of register.
PART 7
Complaints to Preliminary Proceedings Committee concerning
registered medical practitioners
57. Complaints concerning registered medical practitioners.58. Persons to assist Preliminary Proceedings Committee.59. Consideration of complaints by Preliminary Proceedings
Committee.
60. If immediate suspension of registration is necessary to pro-
tect public.
61. No further action or referral of complaint to another body
or authority or to professional competence scheme.
62. Resolution of complaints by mediation or other informal
means.
63. Referral of complaint to Fitness to Practise Committee.
34[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
PART 8
Complaints referred to Fitness to Practise Committee
64. Duty to notify registered medical practitioner and complain-
ant or other witnesses of referral to, and hearing by,Fitness to Practise Committee.
65. Conduct of hearing.66. Powers and protections relating to witnesses and evidence.67. If registered medical practitioner consents to censure or
remedial action, etc.
68. If complaint is withdrawn while it is being considered by Fit-
ness to Practise Committee.
69. Report to Council by Fitness to Practise Committee.70. Steps to be taken by Council after receiving report.
PART 9
Imposition of sanctions on registered medical practitioners
following reports of Fitness to Practise Committee
71. Duty of Council to decide on appropriate sanction.72. Provisions supplementary to section 71 .
73. Duty to notify registered medical practitioner of Council’s
sanction.
74. Confirmation by Court required before certain decisions
become effective.
75. Appeal to Court against Council’s decision under section 71 .
76. Application to Court for confirmation of Council’s decision.77. Evidence relating to appeal under section 75(1) or appli-
cation under section 76(1) to Court.
78. Duty to notify registered medical practitioner of compliance
with decisions confirmed or given by Court.
79. Removal of registration for failure to pay fee.80. Restoration, etc., of registration following payment of cer-
tain fees.
81. Restoration of registration which has been cancelled.82. Removal of conditions attached to registration.
83. Appeal to Court against Council’s decision under section 81
or82.
84. Notification to Minister, Health Service Executive and
employer of certain matters relating to sanctions.
85. Information Council may publish in public interest.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
PART 10
Education and Training
86. Duties of Health Service Executive in relation to medical and
dental education and training.
87. Functions of Council in relation to Directives of European
Union relating to medical education and training.
88. Duties of Council in relation to medical education and
training.
89. Training bodies and qualifications for the purposes of the
Specialist and Trainee Specialist Divisions.
90. Appeal to Court against Council’s decision under section
88(2)(a)(i)(II) or(ii)or89(3)(a)(ii) or(b).
PART 11
Maintenance of Professional Competence
91. Duty of Council in relation to maintenance of professional
competence of registered medical practitioners.
92. Appeal to Court against Council’s decision under section
91(4)(a) or(b).
93. Duty of Health Service Executive and other employers in
relation to the maintenance of professional com-petence of registered medical practitioners.
94. Duty of registered medical practitioners to maintain pro-
fessional competence.
95. Confidentiality.
PART 12
Dissolution of Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board
96. Interpretation of Part 12 .
97. Transfer day and dissolution of Board.98. Minister may require information from Board.99. Transfer of staff.
100. Transfer of property and liabilities to Health Service
Executive.
101. Preservation of certain contracts and adaptation of
references.
102. Pending legal proceedings.
103. Preparation of accounts.
56[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
PART 13
Miscellaneous
104. Privilege.105. Investigation.106. Council to be licensing authority, etc., under Anatomy Act
1832.
107. Power to specify forms.108. Construction of references to registered medical practitioner
and Medical Council, etc.
109. Persons entitled to sign medical certificates.
SCHEDULE 1
Repeals and Revocations
PART 1
Acts Repealed
PART 2
Statutory Instruments Revoked
SCHEDULE 2
Council: Membership and Meetings
————————[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Anatomy Act 1832 2 & 3 Will. IV c. 75
Carer’s Leave Act 2001 2001, No. 19Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 27Dentists Act 1985 1985, No. 9Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 1995, No. 22European Communities Act 1972 1972, No. 27European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2Freedom of Information Acts 1997 and 2003Health Acts 1947 to 2007Health Act 2004 2004, No. 42Health Act 2007 2007, No. 23Health and Social Care Professionals Act 2005 2005, No. 27Higher Education Authority Act 1971 1971, No. 22Local Government (Superannuation) Act 1980 1980, No. 8Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 17Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 2000 2000, No. 24Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 2002 2002, No. 17Medical Practitioners Act 1927 1927, No. 25Medical Practitioners Act 1978 1978, No. 4Medical Practitioners Acts 1978 to 2002Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005
Nurses Act 1985 1985, No. 18Organisation of Working Time Act 1997 1997, No. 20Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006Pharmacy Acts 1875 to 1977Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001 2001, No. 45Public Service Superannuation (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act 2004 2004, No. 7
Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003Standards in Public Office Act 2001 2001, No. 31Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005
78————————
Number 25of2007
————————
MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT FOR THE PURPOSE OF BETTER PROTECTING
AND INFORMING THE PUBLIC IN ITS DEALINGS WITHMEDICAL PRACTITIONERS AND, FOR THAT PUR-POSE, TO INTRODUCE MEASURES, IN ADDITION TOMEASURES PROVIDING FOR THE REGISTRATIONAND CONTROL OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS, TOBETTER ENSURE THE EDUCATION, TRAINING ANDCOMPETENCE OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS, TOAMEND THE MEMBERSHIP AND FUNCTIONS OF THEMEDICAL COUNCIL, TO INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTSAGAINST MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS AND TOINCREASE THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY OF THEMEDICAL COUNCIL; TO GIVE FURTHER EFFECT TOCOUNCIL DIRECTIVE 2005/36/EC; AND, FOR THATPURPOSE, TO REPEAL AND REPLACE THE MEDICALPRACTITIONERS ACTS 1978 TO 2002 AND TO PROVIDEFOR RELATED MATTERS.
[7th May , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Medical Practitioners Act
2007.
(2) The collective citation “the Health Acts 1947 to 2007” shall
include section 57(9) .
(3) The Minister for Health and Children may, by order or orders,
appoint such day or days on which this Act shall come into operation,and different days may be so appointed for different purposes anddifferent provisions.
2.—In this Act, except where the context otherwise requires—
“Act of 1978” means the Medical Practitioners Act 1978;
9Short title and
commencement.
Interpretation.Pt.1S . 2
10[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
“Act of 2002” means the Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act
2002;
“allegation”, in relation to a complaint, means an allegation—
(a) arising out of the complaint, and
(b) which falls within one or more than one of the grounds
specified in section 57(1) ;
“appropriate fee”, in relation to a provision of this Act, means the
fee determined under section 36(1) that is appropriate for that
provision;
“basic medical qualification” means—
(a) a qualification arising from the satisfactory completion of
a programme of basic medical education and trainingapproved under section 88(2)(a)(i)(I) ,
(b) a qualification in basic medical training specified in point
5.1.1 of Annex V to Directive 2005/36/EC, or
(c) a degree, diploma or other qualification recognised under
section 88(7) to be at least the equivalent of a qualifi-
cation referred to in paragraph (a) ;
“business plan” means a business plan prepared pursuant to section
15(1) ;
“cancel”, in relation to the registration of a medical practitioner,
means to delete the practitioner’s name from the register pursuantto a decision referred to in section 78(3) to cancel the registration of
the practitioner;
“certificate of experience” means a certificate of experience granted
to a medical practitioner pursuant to section 49(2) ;
“certificate of registration” means a certificate referred to in section
43(5) ;
“chief executive officer” means the chief executive officer of the
Council appointed under section 24(1) ;
“committee” means a committee established under section 20(1) ,(2),
(3)or(4);
“complainant”, in relation to a complaint, means the person
(including the Council) who made the complaint;
“complaint” means a complaint under section 57(1) ;
“conditions” includes terms;“Council” means Comhairle na nDochtu ´irı´Leighis or the Medical
Council established by the Act of 1978 and continued in being bysection 4(1) ;
“Court” means the High Court;“decision”, in relation to an appeal under section 54 ,75,83,90or92,
includes part of a decision;
“Dental Council” means An Chomhairle Fiaclo ´ireachta or the Den-
tal Council established by the Dentists Act 1985;[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
“Directive 2005/36/EC” means Directive 2005/36/EC of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on therecognition of professional qualifications
1;
“Fitness to Practise Committee” means the committee established
under section 20(2)(b) ;
“formal qualification” means—
(a) a basic medical qualification, and
(b) a certificate of experience;
“General Division” means that division of the register referred to in
section 43(2)(a) ;
“General Register of Medical Practitioners” means the register
established under section 26 of the Act of 1978;
“give” includes send, whether by post or electronic or other means,
and cognate words shall be construed accordingly;
“Health Service Executive” means the Health Service Executive
established under section 6 of the Health Act 2004;
“Higher Education Authority” means An tU ´dara´s um Ard-Oide-
achas established by section 2 of the Higher Education AuthorityAct 1971;
“inquiry” means an inquiry into a complaint by the Fitness to Prac-
tise Committee pursuant to a referral under section 63 ;
“local authority” has the same meaning as it has in the Local Govern-
ment Act 2001;
“material interest” means material interest as construed in accord-
ance with the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995;
“medical practitioner” means a person who holds a basic medical
qualification;
“Member State” means a state other than the State which is a
member of the European Union and includes states which are partiesto the agreement on the European Economic Area signed at Oportoon 2 May 1992 as adjusted by the protocol done at Brussels on 17March 1993 and the Swiss Confederation;
“Minister” means the Minister for Health and Children;“poor professional performance”, in relation to a medical prac-
titioner, means a failure by the practitioner to meet the standards ofcompetence (whether in knowledge and skill or the application ofknowledge and skill or both) that can reasonably be expected ofmedical practitioners practising medicine of the kind practised bythe practitioner;
“practice of medicine” includes practice of surgery and other dis-
ciplines of medicine;
“practise medicine” means to engage in the practice of medicine;“Preliminary Proceedings Committee” means the committee estab-
lished under section 20(2)(a) ;
1OJ L255, 30.9.2005, p. 22
11Pt.1S . 2Pt.1S . 2
12[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
“professional competence scheme” means a scheme established
under section 91(2) ;
“published in the prescribed manner”, in relation to any document
or information (howsoever described), means the document or infor-mation, as the case may be—
(a) is published on a relevant Internet website, and
(b) is available for inspection, at the offices of the Council and
at all reasonable times, by members of the public;
“register” means the register of medical practitioners established
under section 43(1) ;
“registered”, in relation to a medical practitioner, means registered
under section 46 ,47,48,49or50;
“registered dentist” means a person whose name is entered in the
Register of Dentists established under the Dentists Act 1985;
“registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner
whose name is entered in the register;
“register establishment day” means the date specified in the notice
referred to in section 44(3) published in Iris Oifigiu ´ilas the date on
which the register comes into operation;
“Register of Medical Specialists” means the register established
under section 30 of the Act of 1978;
“relevant conditions”, in relation to a registered medical practitioner,
means any conditions attached to the registration of the practitionerpursuant to—
(a)section 53(3) ,
(b) a decision confirmed or given under section 54(4) ,
(c) a decision referred to in section 78(1) ,
(d)section 81(3) ,o r
(e) a decision confirmed or given under section 83(3) ;
“relevant Internet website” means an Internet website of the Council
(including part of such a website)—
(a) to which access is readily available by members of the
public, and
(b) where anything published on the website is readily avail-
able for inspection by members of the public;
“relevant medical disability”, in relation to a medical practitioner,
means a physical or mental disability of the practitioner (includingaddiction to alcohol or drugs) which may impair the practitioner’sability to practise medicine or a particular aspect thereof;
“remove”, in relation to the registration of a medical practitioner,
means to delete the practitioner’s name from the register pursuanttosection 52(2) or(6), 55(1) or79(1) ;
“restore”, in relation to the registration of a medical practitioner,
means to re-enter the practitioner’s name in the register pursuant to[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
section 52(5), 80 or81(2) or a decision confirmed or given under
section 54(4) or83(3) ;
“section 20(2) committee” means a committee established under
section 20(2)(a) or(b);
“Specialist Division” means that division of the register referred to
insection 43(2)(b) ;
“statement of strategy” means a statement of strategy prepared pur-
suant to section 13(1) ;
“third country” means a state other than the State or a Member
State;
“Trainee Specialist Division” means that division of the register
referred to in section 43(2)(c) ;
“unregistered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner
who is not registered;
“visiting EEA practitioner” means a medical practitioner who falls
within section 50(1) ;
“Visiting EEA Practitioners Division” means that division of the
register referred to in section 43(2)(d) .
3.—(1) The Acts specified in Part 1 ofSchedule 1 are repealed.
(2) The statutory instruments specified in Part 2 ofSchedule 1
are revoked.
PART 2
Continuance in being of Council and object and functions of
Council, etc.
4.—(1) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by section
3—
(a) the body known as Comhairle na nDochtu ´irı´Leighis, or
in the English language as the Medical Council, estab-lished by section 6 of that Act shall continue in being, and
(b) subject to subsections (5) and (6), anything commenced
but not completed by that body, or the committee estab-lished under section 13(2)( b) of the Act of 1978, before
the commencement of section 3 may be carried on and
completed by the Council (with its membership as consti-tuted under this Act) or that committee (with its mem-bership as constituted under section 13 of the Act of 1978but irrespective of whether a member of that committeebecame such a member before, on or after thatcommencement), as the case requires, after such com-mencement as if—
(i) the Acts specified in Part 1 ofSchedule 1 had not been
repealed, and
(ii) the statutory instruments specified in Part 2 ofSched-
ule 1 had not been revoked.
13Pt.1S . 2
Repeals and
revocations.
Continuance in
being of Council.Pt.2S . 4
14[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) The Council is a body corporate with perpetual succession and
an official seal and with power—
(a) to sue and be sued in its corporate name, and
(b) with the consent of the Minister and the Minister for Fin-
ance, to acquire, hold and dispose of land or an interestin land, and to acquire, hold and dispose of any otherproperty.
(3) The Council may, subject to the provisions of this Act, regu-
late its own procedure.
(4) Schedule 2 applies to the Council.
(5) A person who—
(a) immediately before the commencement of section 3 , was a
member of the Council and of the committee referred toinsubsection (1)(b) , and
(b) on that commencement, ceases to be a member of the
Council but remains a member of that committee,
shall, for so long as the person continues to be a member of that
committee, and for the purposes of subsection (1)(b) , be deemed to
satisfy the requirements of section 13 of the Act of 1978 relating tothe membership of that committee.
(6) Where pursuant to subsection (1)(b) the Council may take any
relevant action in respect of the registration of a medical practitioner,then the Council may take the equivalent action under this Actand—
(a) in the case of equivalent action falling within paragraph
(a)of the definition of “equivalent action”, section 81
shall apply to the equivalent action accordingly,
(b) in the case of equivalent action falling within paragraph
(c)of the definition of “equivalent action”—
(i)paragraph (c) of the definition of “relevant con-
ditions” in section 2 shall be construed to include the
equivalent action accordingly, and
(ii) sections 43(6) and 82shall apply to the equivalent
action accordingly.
(7) In subsection (6) —
“equivalent action”, in relation to the registration of a medical prac-
titioner, means—
(a) in the case of paragraph (a) of the definition of “relevant
action”, the cancellation of the registration pursuant to adecision referred to in section 78(3) ,
(b) in the case of paragraph (b) of the definition of “relevant
action”, the suspension of the registration pursuant to adecision referred to in section 78(3) ,[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(c) in the case of paragraph (c) of the definition of “relevant
action”, the attachment of conditions to the registrationpursuant to a decision referred to in section 78(1) ;
“relevant action”, in relation to the registration of a medical prac-
titioner, means any action under Part V of the Act of 1978 pursuantto which the Council may—
(a) erase the practitioner’s name from the General Register
of Medical Practitioners or the Register of MedicalSpecialists,
(b) give effect to a decision of the Council that during a period
of specified duration the registration of the practitioner’sname in a register referred to in paragraph (a) shall not
have effect, or
(c) attach conditions to the retention of the practitioner’s
name in a register referred to in paragraph (a) .
5.—(1) The seal of the Council shall be authenticated by—
(a) the signature of the President of the Council or another
member of the Council authorised by the Council to actin that behalf, and
(b) the signature of a member of the staff of the Council auth-
orised by the Council to act in that behalf.
(2) Judicial notice shall be taken of the seal of the Council and,
accordingly, every document—
(a) purporting to be an instrument made by the Council, and
(b) purporting to be sealed with the seal of the Council auth-
enticated in accordance with subsection (1) ,
shall be received in evidence and be deemed to be such instrument
without further proof unless the contrary is proved.
6.—The object of the Council is to protect the public by promoting
and better ensuring high standards of professional conduct and pro-fessional education, training and competence among registered medi-cal practitioners.
7.—(1) The Council shall—
(a) do all things necessary and reasonable to further its
object, and
(b) perform its functions in the public interest.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Council shall—
(a) establish and maintain the register,
(b) establish procedures and criteria for registration including
the issue of certificates of registration and renewal ofregistration,
15Pt.2S . 4
Seal of Council.
Object of Council.
Functions of
Council.Pt.2S . 7
16[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(c) approve programmes of education and further education
necessary for the purposes of registration and continuedregistration,
(d) keep the programmes referred to in paragraph (c) under
review,
(e) specify the standards required for the purposes of the
maintenance of the professional competence of registeredmedical practitioners,
(f) keep the standards referred to in paragraph (e) under
review,
(g) act as the competent authority for the purposes of—
(i) the mutual recognition of medical qualifications
awarded in or recognised by Member States,
(ii) all matters referred to in Directive 2005/36/EC which
relate to the role of a competent authority for thepurposes of the recognition of professional qualifi-cations of medical practitioners,
(h) enter into agreements, with bodies in third countries that
are duly authorised to perform functions in third coun-tries that correspond to the functions of the Council, inrelation to—
(i) the recognition by the Council, for the purposes of
registration, of degrees, diplomas and other qualifi-cations relating to the practice of medicine awardedin third countries,
(ii) the recognition by such bodies, for the purposes of
authorisation to practise medicine in third countries,of degrees, diplomas and other qualifications relatingto the practice of medicine awarded in the State,
(i) specify standards of practice for registered medical prac-
titioners, including the establishment, publication, main-tenance and review of appropriate guidance on allmatters related to professional conduct and ethics forregistered medical practitioners,
(j) establish committees to inquire into complaints,
(k) make decisions and give directions under Part 9 relating
to the imposition of sanctions on registered medical prac-titioners,
(l) advise the public on all matters of general interest relating
to the functions of the Council, its area of expertise andother matters of interest to the public relating to the prac-tice of medicine and medical practitioners, includingpublic advertisement of the object, functions and contactdetails of the Council from time to time, and
(m) perform any other function conferred on it by any other
provision of this Act or of any other enactment.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2)(i) , the
Council’s function under that subsection shall include standards of[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
practice relating to advertising by registered medical practitioners,
or classes of registered medical practitioners, and, in connectiontherewith, the disclosure of appropriate information relating to thefees to be charged for the medical services the subject of suchadvertising.
(4) The Council shall, in performing its functions, have regard
to—
(a) functions performed by other bodies that are similar or
ancillary to the functions that the Council performs,
(b) the need to co-operate with and co-ordinate its activities
with those of other public authorities or bodies (in part-icular, the Health Service Executive) if the performanceof their functions affects or could affect the health ofthe public,
(c) the need to promote efficiencies in the delivery of special-
ist training and intern training through the developmentof standard practices,
(d) the policies and objectives of the Government or any
Minister of the Government to the extent that those poli-cies and objectives may affect or relate to the functionsof the Council,
(e) the resources, wherever originating, that are available to
it for the purpose of performing its functions, and
(f) the need to secure the most beneficial, effective and
efficient use of those resources.
(5) The Council has power to do anything that appears to it to be
requisite, advantageous or incidental to, or to facilitate, the perform-ance of its functions.
(6) The Minister, or a person authorised by the Minister to give
a notice under this subsection, may by notice in writing given to theCouncil require the Council to provide the Minister or that person,as the case may be, with such information in relation to the perform-ance of the Council’s functions as is specified in the notice and withinthe period specified in the notice (being a period reasonable in thecircumstances).
(7) The Council shall comply with a notice given to it under sub-
section (6) except to the extent that it is prohibited from doing so by
another provision of this Act.
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting the
power of any Minister of the Government to make regulations undersection 3 of the European Communities Act 1972.
8.—(1) The Minister may by order—
(a) confer on the Council such additional functions connec-
ted with—
(i) registered medical practitioners, their education and
training and the practice of medicine by medicalpractitioners, or
17Pt.2S . 7
Conferral of
additional functionson Council.Pt.2S . 8
Ministerial
directions toCouncil.
Immunity.
Council’s power to
make rules.[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(ii) the implementation of any directive or regulation of
the European Union concerning the practice ofmedicine, medical practitioners who practise medi-cine and the recognition of qualifications of medicalpractitioners exercising their right to freedom ofmovement within the European Union,
as the Minister thinks fit, and
(b) make such provisions as the Minister considers necessary
or expedient in relation to matters ancillary to or arisingout of the conferral of additional functions on theCouncil.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the order is passed by either such House withinthe next 21 days on which the House has sat after that order is laidbefore it, the order shall be annulled accordingly, but without preju-dice to the validity of anything previously done under it.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting the
power of any Minister of the Government to make regulations undersection 3 of the European Communities Act 1972.
9.—(1) The Minister may give general policy directions in writing
to the Council in relation to the performance by the Council of itsfunctions except any such functions—
(a) relating to the professional conduct and ethics of regis-
tered medical practitioners, or
(b) under any of Parts 7 ,8and 9.
(2) Nothing in directions given under subsection (1) is to be con-
strued to prevent the Council from, or to limit the Council in, per-forming its functions.
10.—(1) No person to whom this subsection applies, acting in
good faith, shall be personally liable in any civil proceedings for anyact done or default made in the performance or purported perform-ance of any function under this Act.
(2) The persons to whom subsection (1) applies are—
(a) the members and former members of the Council,
(b) the members and former members of any committee,
(c) the chief executive officer and any former chief executive
officer,
(d) the staff and former staff of the Council, and
(e) the persons appointed or formerly appointed under section
58(1) to assist the Preliminary Proceedings Committee.
11.—(1) Subject to subsections (3) ,(4)and (5), the Council—[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) may make rules for the purposes of the better operation
of any provision of this Act, or
(b) at the request in writing of the Minister and in accordance
with the request, shall make rules for the purposes of thebetter operation of any provision of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Council may make rules under this section in relation to—
(a) the establishment, membership, functions and procedures
of committees,
(b) the form and manner in which the register and its divisions
are to be maintained,
(c) the details relating to medical practitioners that, in
addition to their names, are to be entered in the registeror their certificates of registration or both,
(d) the manner in which appropriate fees are to be paid and
the time limits for payment of appropriate fees for theretention of registration,
(e) the receiving and recording of evidence by section 20(2)
committees,
(f) the receiving of submissions by section 20(2) committees,
(g) the establishment, membership, functions and procedures
of subcommittees of committees including, in the case ofthe Fitness to Practise Committee, subcommittees inquir-ing, on behalf of that Committee, into different groundsfounding a complaint,
(h) the setting of criteria for assessing applications for regis-
tration in the Specialist Division,
(i) the specification of examinations for the purposes of sub-
paragraph (i) ofsection 46(b) ,
(j) the specification of grounds for the purposes of subpara-
graph (ii) ofsection 46(b) ,
(k) the grounds on which subparagraph (iv) ofsection 46(b)
shall not apply to a medical practitioner due to theunfeasibility of a document referred to in that subpara-graph being produced in respect of that practitioner,
(l) the grounds on which paragraph (c) ofsection 48(2) or
(3)shall not apply to a medical practitioner due to the
unfeasibility of a document referred to in that paragraphbeing produced in respect of that practitioner,
(m) the specification of examinations for the purpose of subpa-
ragraph (i) ofsection 48(3)(a) ,
(n) the specification of grounds for the purposes of subpara-
graph (ii) ofsection 48(3)(a) ,
(o) the specification of examinations for the purposes of sub-
paragraph (i) ofsection 48(4)(a) ,
19Pt.2 S.11Pt.2 S.11
20[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(p) the specification of grounds for the purposes of subpara-
graph (ii) ofsection 48(4)(a) ,
(q) the specification of requirements for the purposes of para-
graph (c) ofsection 48(4) ,
(r) the specification of—
(i) a period or periods,
(ii) a hospital, health institution, clinic, general medical
practice, or other health service setting,
for the purposes of subsection (3) ofsection 49 ,
(s) the setting of criteria that the Council shall consider under
section 81 for the restoration of a medical practitioner’s
registration,
(t) the setting of criteria for the purposes of section 88(2)(a) ,
(u) the setting of criteria for the purposes of section 88(3)(a)
or(4)(a) ,
(v) the setting of criteria, in relation to each medical specialty
recognised under section 89(1) , for the purposes of
section 89(3) ,
(w) the setting of criteria for the purposes of section 91(4) ,
(x) any professional competence scheme,
(y) any other matter relating to the Council’s functions.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2)(e) and
(f), rules made under this section may specify—
(a) the form in which and the means by which evidence or
submissions may be received by section 20(2) commit-
tees, and
(b) the conditions subject to which evidence or submissions
may be received by section 20(2) committees by means
of a live video link, a video recording, a sound recordingor any other mode of transmission.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2)(x) , rules
made under this section may specify—
(a) categories of registered medical practitioners to which a
professional competence scheme applies,
(b) definitions and descriptions of categories or ranges of
activities which fall within a professional competencescheme,
(c) obligations to be placed on medical practitioners or categ-
ories of medical practitioners specified under paragraph
(a)by virtue of a professional competence scheme,
(d) procedures to be followed by the Council and by regis-
tered medical practitioners for the purposes of a pro-fessional competence scheme (including, in the case of[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
the Council, procedures to be followed for the purposes
of the operation, administration and supervision of theprofessional competence scheme).
(5) The Council shall ensure that—
(a) a draft of any rule (including a rule revoking or amending
any other rule) that it proposes to make under thissection is published in the prescribed manner,
(b) with the draft is published an invitation to members of the
public, any organisation and any other body to commenton the draft before a date specified by the Council in theinvitation, being a date reasonable in the circumstances,and
(c) without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (b) ,a
copy of the draft of the rule is given to—
(i) the Minister,
(ii) the Health Service Executive, and
(iii) if the draft relates to a competence scheme, the Mini-
ster for Finance,
not later than the date on which the Council complies
with paragraph (a) in respect of that draft.
(6) Subject to subsection (7) , the Council, after considering any
comments on a draft of a rule published pursuant to subsection (5)(a)
received before the date specified in the invitation referred to insubsection (5)(b) which relates to the draft, may—
(a) make the rule in the form of the draft as published or with
such changes as the Council determines, or
(b) decide not to make the rule.
(7) The Council shall not make rules under this section relating
to a professional competence scheme except with the consent of theMinister and the Minister for Finance.
(8) The Council shall ensure that, as soon as is practicable after a
rule is made under this section, the rule—
(a) is published in the prescribed manner, and
(b) is submitted to the Minister for laying before each House
of the Oireachtas.
(9) Every rule made under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the rule is passed by either such House withinthe next 21 days on which the House has sat after that rule is laidbefore it, the rule shall be annulled accordingly, but without preju-dice to the validity of anything previously done under it.
12.—(1) Without prejudice to the operation of section 62 or
88(2)(b) or(i),(3)(b) ,(4)(b) or(8), the Council may from time to
time prepare, for the guidance of medical practitioners and the
21Pt.2 S.11
Council’s power to
issue guidelines.Pt.2 S.12
Council to prepare
and submitstatement ofstrategy.
22[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
public, guidelines not inconsistent with this Act (including any regu-
lations or rules made under this Act) indicating the manner in whichthe Council proposes to perform its functions.
(2) The Council shall ensure that guidelines prepared by it under
this section are published in the prescribed manner as soon as ispracticable after the guidelines have been prepared.
PART 3
Statement of Strategy, Business Plan and Annual Report of
Council
13.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) to(5), the Council shall—
(a) prepare and adopt a statement of strategy for the term of
office of the Council (or, as the case requires, the remain-ing term of office of the Council), and
(b) submit the statement to the Minister—
(i) within 6 months after the commencement of this
section,
(ii) within 6 months after the appointment of a new Mini-
ster having charge of the Department of Health andChildren if that Minister requests that a statement ofstrategy be submitted,
(iii) within 6 months of the beginning of the term of office
of each new Council appointed under section 17 .
(2) The Council shall prepare a statement of strategy in a form
and manner in accordance with any directions issued by the Ministerand shall ensure that the statement specifies—
(a) the key objectives of the Council for the period to which
the statement relates and the strategies for achievingthose objectives,
(b) the manner in which the Council proposes to measure its
achievement of those objectives, and
(c) the uses for which the Council proposes to apply its
resources.
(3) The Council shall, in preparing the statement of strategy, have
regard to the policies of the Government or a Minister of theGovernment to the extent that those policies may affect or relate tothe functions of the Council.
(4) The Minister may direct the Council to amend a statement
of strategy submitted to the Minister if, in the Minister’s opinion,the statement—
(a) does not contain any information required under subsec-
tion (2) ,
(b) does not comply in any other respect with subsection (2) ,
or[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(c) has been prepared without regard to the policies referred
to in subsection (3) .
(5) The Council shall comply with a direction given to it under
subsection (4) within the period, if any, specified in the direction,
being a period reasonable in the circumstances.
(6) The Council may amend an adopted statement of strategy
and, in any such case—
(a)subsections (2) to(5)shall, with all necessary modifi-
cations, apply to the preparation of the amended state-ment as they apply to a statement of strategy preparedunder subsection (1) , and
(b) the Council shall adopt the amended statement and submit
it to the Minister within 3 weeks of the date on which theCouncil adopted the amended statement.
(7) Nothing in a statement of strategy is to be construed to
prevent the Council from, or to limit the Council in, performing itsfunctions.
14.—(1) The Minister shall ensure that a copy of a statement of
strategy or an amended statement of strategy is laid before eachHouse of the Oireachtas within 21 days after the statement isreceived by the Minister.
(2) The Council shall ensure that, as soon as is practicable after
copies of a statement of strategy or of an amended statement ofstrategy are laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas, the statementis published in the prescribed manner.
(3) The Council shall submit progress reports to the Minister on
the implementation of a statement of strategy or an amended state-ment of strategy, as the case requires—
(a) in its annual report, and
(b) in such other manner and at such intervals as the Minister
may direct.
(4) During the specified period, the Freedom of Information Acts
1997 and 2003 shall not apply to a record containing—
(a) a statement of strategy, or an amendment to a statement
of strategy, that has not been adopted by the Council, or
(b) a preliminary or other draft of all or part of the contents
of a statement of strategy or of an amendment to a state-ment of strategy.
(5) In subsection (4) , “specified period”, in relation to a record,
means a period of 5 years commencing on the date of creation ofthe record.
15.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) to(5), the Council shall—
(a) prepare and adopt a business plan for the calendar year or
other period as may be determined by the Minister, and
23Pt.3 S.13
Publication and
implementation ofstatement ofstrategy.
Council to prepare
and forwardbusiness plan toMinister.Pt.3 S.15
24[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(b) submit the plan to the Minister.
(2) The Council shall prepare a business plan in a form and man-
ner in accordance with any directions issued by the Minister(including any timescale in which the plan must be submitted to theMinister) and shall ensure that the plan—
(a) indicates the type and volume of business to be under-
taken by the Council during the period to which theplan relates,
(b) indicates any capital plans proposed by the Council,
(c) contains estimates of the number of staff of the Council for
the period and the business to which the plan relates, and
(d) contains any other information specified by the Minister.
(3) The Council shall, in preparing a business plan, have regard
to—
(a) the statement of strategy in operation at that time,
(b) any direction issued by the Minister under section 9(1) ,
and
(c) the policies and objectives of the Minister and the Govern-
ment as they relate to the functions of the Council.
(4) The Minister may direct the Council to amend a business plan
submitted to the Minister if, in the Minister’s opinion, the plan—
(a) does not contain any information required under subsec-
tion (2) ,
(b) does not comply in any other respect with subsection (2) ,
or
(c) has been prepared without regard to a matter specified in
subsection (3) .
(5) The Council shall comply with a direction given to it under
subsection (4) within the period, if any, specified in the direction,
being a period reasonable in the circumstances.
(6) The Council shall submit to the Minister with a business plan
a statement of its estimate of the income and expenditure relating tothe plan that is consistent with the monies estimated to be availableto the Council for the period to which the business plan relates.
(7) The Minister shall ensure that copies of a business plan sub-
mitted to the Minister are laid before each House of the Oireachtaswithin 21 days after the plan is so submitted.
(8) The Council shall ensure that, as soon as is practicable after
copies of a business plan are laid before the Houses of theOireachtas, the plan is published in the prescribed manner.
(9) The Council may amend an adopted business plan and, in any
such case—
(a)subsections (2) to(8)shall, with all necessary modifi-
cations, apply to the preparation of the amended plan as[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
they apply to a business plan prepared under subsection
(1), and
(b) the Council shall adopt the amended plan and submit it to
the Minister within 3 weeks of the date on which theCouncil adopted the amended plan.
16.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , the Council shall, not later than
3 months after the end of each financial year or such further period,not exceeding 3 months, as the Minister permits, submit to the Mini-ster a report (in this section referred to as the “annual report”) of theactivities of the Council in the immediately preceding financial year.
(2) The Minister may specify, by direction in writing to the
Council, any information which is required to be included in theannual report.
(3) The Council shall comply with a direction given to it under
subsection (2) .
(4) The Minister shall ensure that copies of the annual report are
laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be afterthe report is received by the Minister.
PART 4
Members, Committees and Staff of Council
17.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) to(9), the members of the
Council shall be appointed by the Minister and shall consist of thefollowing 25 persons:
(a) 2 persons jointly nominated by the bodies approved under
section 88(2)(a)(i)(II) to deliver programmes of basic
medical education and training;
(b) one registered medical practitioner nominated by the
Royal College of Physicians of Ireland in relation tomedical specialties;
(c) one registered medical practitioner nominated by the
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in relation to surgi-cal specialties;
(d) one registered medical practitioner nominated by the Irish
College of General Practitioners in relation to generalpractice;
(e) one registered medical practitioner nominated by—
(i) subject to subparagraph (ii) , the Irish Psychiatric
Training Committee in relation to psychiatry,
(ii) if a body other than that Committee is approved
under section 89(3)(a)(ii) to grant evidence of the
satisfactory completion of specialist training inrelation to psychiatry, that body;
(f) 6 registered medical practitioners practising medicine in
the State (but excluding any visiting EEA practitioner)
25Pt.3 S.15
Council to submit
annual report toMinister.
Members of
Council.Pt.4 S.17
26[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
following their election, in accordance with regulations
made under section 18 , by registered medical prac-
titioners;
(g) one person nominated by the Royal Irish Academy who is
not and never has been a medical practitioner in the Stateor in another jurisdiction;
(h) 2 persons nominated by the Health Service Executive who
are representative of the management of the publichealth sector;
(i) one person nominated by the Minister for Education and
Science, after consultation with the Higher EducationAuthority, who is not and never has been a medical prac-titioner in the State or in another jurisdiction;
(j) one person nominated by An Bord Altranais whose name
is entered in the register of nurses and midwives main-tained under the Nurses Act 1985;
(k) one person nominated by the Health and Social Care Pro-
fessionals Council—
(i) subject to subparagraph (ii) , who is a registrant within
the meaning of section 3 of the Health and SocialCare Professionals Act 2005,
(ii) in the absence of any such registrant, a person who
is a member of a designated profession within themeaning of that section;
(l) one person nominated by the Health Information and
Quality Authority who is not and never has been a medi-cal practitioner in the State or in another jurisdiction;
(m) one person nominated by the Independent Hospitals
Association of Ireland who is not and never has been amedical practitioner in the State or in another juris-diction; and
(n) 5 persons who—
(i) are not and never have been medical practitioners in
the State or in another jurisdiction, and
(ii) have such qualifications, expertise, interests or experi-
ence as, in the opinion of the Minister, would enablethem to make a contribution to the performance ofthe Council’s functions.
(2) Members of the Council shall perform their functions as such
in the public interest.
(3) Only registered medical practitioners are eligible for election
as the President or Vice-President of the Council in accordance withSchedule 2 .
(4) The persons appointed under subsection (1)(n) may include
members of advocacy groups and users of services provided by regis-tered medical practitioners.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(5) The Minister shall, to the extent practicable, endeavour to
ensure that there is an equitable balance between men and womenin the membership of the Council.
(6) The Minister shall ensure that, as soon as is practicable after
a person is appointed as a member of the Council, a notice to thateffect that includes the person’s name is published in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(7) A person is not eligible for appointment as a member of the
Council, or of a committee, if the person is—
(a) a member of either House of the Oireachtas or of the
European Parliament,
(b) regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European Parlia-
ment Elections Act 1997, as having been elected to theEuropean Parliament to fill a vacancy, or
(c) a member of a local authority.
(8) The 6 registered medical practitioners appointed under sub-
section (1)(f) shall consist of—
(a) one medical practitioner registered, or able to be regis-
tered, in the Specialist Division in relation to obstetricsand gynaecology,
(b) one medical practitioner registered, or able to be regis-
tered, in the Specialist Division in relation to anaesthesia,
(c) one medical practitioner registered, or able to be regis-
tered, in the Specialist Division in relation to publichealth medicine,
(d) one medical practitioner registered, or able to be regis-
tered, in the Specialist Division in relation to pathologyor radiology,
(e) one registered medical practitioner, not being a consultant,
practising medicine in a hospital, and
(f) one registered medical practitioner not falling within any
ofparagraphs (a) to(e).
(9) Without prejudice to the generality of the other provisions of
this Act relating to the membership of the Council—
(a) the Minister may not refuse to appoint as a member of the
Council a person nominated under subsection (1)(a) ,(b),
(c),(d),(e),(g),(h),(i),(j),(k),(l)or(m) or elected as
referred to in s ubsection (1)(f) , and
(b) a person who was a member of the Council immediately
before the commencement of section 3 shall, on that com-
mencement, cease to be a member of the Council unlessthe person is appointed pursuant to subsection (1) to be
a member of the Council.
18.—(1) The Minister may make regulations to specify the pro-
cedures to be followed for the purposes of an election referred to insection 17(1)(f) (including procedures preparatory to, or subsequent
to, such an election).
27Pt.4 S.17
Elections.Pt.4 S.18
First meeting of
Council under thisAct.
Committees of
Council.
28[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and,if a resolution annulling the regulation is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after that regu-lation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulled accordingly,but without prejudice to the validity of anything previously doneunder it.
19.—(1) The chief executive officer shall give notice in writing to
the members of the Council of the time and place of the first meetingof the Council after the commencement of section 17 .
(2) The Council shall meet at the time and place notified by the
chief executive officer under subsection (1) for its first meeting after
the commencement of section 17 and shall thereupon enter on its
functions under this Act.
20.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) to(13), the Council may estab-
lish committees of the Council to perform any functions that, in theopinion of the Council, may be better or more conveniently perfor-med by a committee and that are assigned by the Council to acommittee.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Council shall establish—
(a) a committee, to be known as the Preliminary Proceedings
Committee, to give initial consideration to complaints,and
(b) a committee, to be known as the Fitness to Practise Com-
mittee, to inquire into complaints,
to perform the functions under Parts 7 ,8and 9that are respectively
assigned to the committees.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Council may establish a committee, to be known as the Educationand Training Committee, to perform such of the Council’s functionsunder Part 10 orsection 106 as are assigned by the Council to the
Committee.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Council may establish a committee, to be known as the Health Com-mittee, to perform such functions as are specified by the Council insupport of—
(a) medical practitioners with relevant medical disabilities,
and
(b) medical practitioners who have given consents under
section 67(1)(c) .
(5) Subject to subsections (7) and (8), a committee may include in
its membership persons who are not members of the Council.
(6) The chairperson of a section 20(2) committee shall be a
member of the Council other than the President or Vice-Presidentof the Council.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(7) No person shall be a member of more than one section 20(2)
committee.
(8) At least one third of the members of a section 20(2) commit-
tee, including the chairperson, shall be members of the Council.
(9) Subject to subsection (10) , at least one third of the member-
ship of the Fitness to Practise Committee shall consist of medicalpractitioners.
(10) The majority of the membership of the Fitness to Practise
Committee shall consist of persons who are not medical prac-titioners.
(11) The majority of the membership of a committee (except the
Fitness to Practise Committee) shall consist of medical practitioners.
(12) The acts of a committee (except a section 20(2) committee)
shall be subject to confirmation by the Council unless the Councildispenses with the necessity for such confirmation.
(13) The Council may, subject to the provisions of this Act, regu-
late the procedure of a committee but, subject to any such regulation,the committee may regulate its own procedure.
(14) The members of a section 20(2) committee, in performing the
functions under this Act respectively conferred on—
(a) the members in their capacity as such members, or
(b) the section 20(2) committee of which they are members,
shall have the same protection and immunity as a judge of the Court
performing the functions of a judge.
21.—A member of the Council or of any committee shall be paid,
out of funds at the disposal of the Council, such allowances for trav-elling and subsistence expenses incurred in respect of the member’sattendance at a meeting of the Council or of the committee, as thecase may be, or otherwise in connection with the affairs of theCouncil as the Minister, with the consent of the Minister for Fin-ance, determines.
22.—(1) The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for
Finance, from time to time determine the amount of an allowancethat may by paid by the Council to—
(a) the President of the Council in respect of the President’s
role as President,
(b) a member of the Council in respect of such membership,
or
(c) a member of a committee in respect of such membership.
(2) An allowance referred to in subsection (1) shall be paid out of
the funds at the disposal of the Council.
29Pt.4 S.20
Expenses of
members of Counciland committees.
Payment of
allowances.Pt.4
Removal of
members of Councilfrom office.
30[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
23.—(1) The Minister may at any time remove a member of the
Council from office if—
(a) the member has become incapable through illness of per-
forming the functions of the office,
(b) the member has committed stated misbehaviour,
(c) whether or not following a review under subsection (9) ,
the Minister is satisfied that the member’s behaviourprevents the Council from, or unnecessarily hinders theCouncil in, performing its functions in an effectivemanner,
(d) the member has contravened—
(i)section 30 ,o r
(ii) an applicable provision of the Ethics in Public Office
Act 1995,
or
(e) in performing functions under this Act, the member has
not been guided by a code of conduct that has beendrawn up under section 10(3) of the Standards in PublicOffice Act 2001 and that relates to the member.
(2) A member of the Council ceases to hold office if the
member—
(a) is adjudicated bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with creditors,
(c) is convicted of an indictable offence,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty,
(e) is the subject of an order under section 160 of the Com-
panies Act 1990,
(f) is sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a court of com-
petent jurisdiction, or
(g) is removed by a competent authority for any reason (other
than failure to pay a fee) from any register establishedfor the purpose of registering members of a profession inthe State or in another jurisdiction.
(3) A member of the Council who does not, for a consecutive
period of 6 months, attend a meeting of the Council ceases at theend of that period to hold office unless the member demonstrates tothe Minister’s satisfaction that the failure to attend was due to illness.
(4) Where the Council does not perform any function conferred
on it under this Act, the Minister may, by order, direct the Councilto perform that function and for that purpose to do such other thingsancillary or incidental thereto as may be specified in the order.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(5) Subject to subsection (7) , where the Council fails to comply
with any direction of the Minister contained in an order under sub-
section (4) , the Minister may, by order, remove from office the
members of the Council.
(6) Subject to subsection (7) , the Minister may, by order, remove
all the members of the Council from office if—
(a) the Council fails to achieve a quorum for 3 consecutive
meetings,
(b) the Council does not comply with a judgment, order or
decree of any court,
(c) the Council does not comply with a direction of the Mini-
ster or any other requirement imposed on it by or underany enactment including this Act, or
(d) whether or not following a review under subsection (9) ,
the Minister is satisfied that the members’ behaviourprevents the Council from, or unnecessarily hinders theCouncil in, performing its functions in an effectivemanner.
(7) An order under subsection (5) or(6)removing the members
of the Council from office shall not have effect unless—
(a) a draft of the proposed order and a statement of the
reasons for the order have been laid before the Housesof the Oireachtas, and
(b) a resolution approving the draft has been passed by each
House.
(8) Where the Council fails to achieve a quorum for 3 consecutive
meetings, the chief executive officer shall, forthwith upon the occur-rence of that failure, give the Minister notice in writing of thatfailure.
(9) The Minister may, if of the opinion that the Council’s func-
tions are not being performed in an effective manner, appoint a per-son to—
(a) conduct an independent review of any matter giving rise
to that opinion, and
(b) submit a report to the Minister on the results of the
review.
(10) For the purposes of a review referred to in subsection (9) , the
Council shall give the person conducting the review all reasonableassistance, including access to such premises, equipment and records,as the person may require for the purposes of the review.
(11) The removal of the members of the Council from office does
not revoke or otherwise affect any delegation of the Council’s func-tions to the chief executive officer under section 24 .
(12) An order under subsection (5) or(6)may contain such pro-
visions as the Minister considers necessary to enable the functions ofthe Council to be performed notwithstanding the removal from officeof its members, and any such order may, in particular, appoint a
31Pt.4 S.23Pt.4 S.23
Chief executive
officer.
Staff of Council.
32[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
person or persons to discharge all or any of the functions of the
Council.
(13) In this section “applicable provision of the Ethics in Public
Office Act 1995”, in relation to a member of the Council, means aprovision of that Act that, by virtue of a regulation under section 3of that Act, applies to that member.
24.—(1) Subject to subsection (4)(a) , the Council shall appoint a
chief executive officer to—
(a) carry on and manage and control generally the admini-
stration of the Council and the business of the Council,and
(b) perform any other functions that may be delegated by
the Council.
(2) Subject to subsection (4)(b) , the chief executive officer holds
office on the conditions (including those relating to remuneration,allowances and superannuation) that are determined by the Councilwith the prior approval of the Minister given with the consent of theMinister for Finance.
(3) The chief executive officer shall be paid by the Council, out
of the funds at its disposal, the remuneration and allowances deter-mined under subsection (2) .
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by section 3 ,
the person who was the Registrar, within the meaning of that Act,immediately before the commencement of that section shall bedeemed to be the chief executive officer of the Council—
(a) as if, on that commencement, the Council had appointed
under subsection (1) the person to be the chief executive
officer of the Council for the remaining period, if any,that was left to run for the person to hold the office ofsuch Registrar immediately before that commencement,and
(b) on the same conditions (including those relating to the
termination of appointment) as the person held office assuch Registrar immediately before that commencement,
and the other provisions of this Act shall be construed accordingly.
25.—(1) Subject to subsection (4)(a) , the Council shall appoint
such and so many persons to be staff of the Council as the Councilfrom time to time thinks proper with the approval of the Ministergiven with the consent of the Minister for Finance.
(2) Subject to subsection (4)(b) , a member of staff of the Council
shall hold office or employment on the conditions (including thoserelating to remuneration, allowances and superannuation) that aredetermined by the Council with the prior approval of the Ministergiven with the consent of the Minister for Finance.
(3) The staff of the Council shall be paid by the Council, out of
the funds at its disposal, the remuneration and allowances deter-mined under subsection (2) .[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by section 3 ,a
person who was an officer or servant of the Council, appointed undersection 17(1) of that Act, immediately before the commencement ofsection 3 shall be deemed to be a member of the staff of the
Council—
(a) as if, on that commencement, the Council had appointed
under subsection (1) the person to be a member of the
staff of the Council for the remaining period, if any, thatwas left to run for the person to hold office as such officeror servant, as the case may be, immediately before thatcommencement, and
(b) on the same conditions (including those relating to termin-
ation of appointment) as the person held office as such
officer or servant, as the case may be, immediately beforethat commencement,
and the other provisions of this Act shall be construed accordingly.
26.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , a person who is a permanent
officer of the Council shall cease to be a permanent officer—
(a) subject to paragraph (b) , on attaining the age of 65 years,
(b) on attaining the higher age specified in an order under
subsection (3) applicable to the person.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to a person who is a new entrant
(within the meaning of the Public Service Superannuation(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2004) appointed on or after 1 April2004.
(3) The Minister may by order fix an age higher than 65 years
upon the attainment of which a person who is a permanent officerof the Council shall cease to be a permanent officer.
27.—The Local Government (Superannuation) Act 1980 shall
apply to the Council and its staff as if the Council were a local auth-ority and the staff were the staff of a local authority but subject toany modifications (including modifications relating to service reckon-able as pensionable service) which may, with the consent of the Mini-ster for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, be deter-mined by the Minister.
28.—(1) Where a person who is a member of the staff of the
Council (including the chief executive officer) becomes a member ofeither House of the Oireachtas, the person—
(a) shall stand seconded from being a member of such staff
during the period (in this section referred to as the “se-condment period”)—
(i) commencing on the date the person becomes entitled
under the Standing Orders of that House to sit ther-ein, and
(ii) ending on the date when—
33Pt.4 S.25
Age limits.
Superannuation.
Membership of
either House ofOireachtas bymember of staff ofCouncil.Pt.4 S.28
Membership of
local authority orEuropeanParliament bymember of staff ofCouncil.
Disclosure of
interests bymembers of Councilor committee.
34[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(I) the person ceases to be a member of that
House, or
(II) the person ceases to be a member of such staff,
whichever is the earlier,
(b) shall not be paid by, or entitled to receive from, the
Council any remuneration or allowance in respect of thesecondment period, and
(c) shall not be entitled to reckon the whole or any part of
the secondment period for any superannuation benefitspayable under this Act.
(2) A person who is for the time being entitled under the Standing
Orders of either House of the Oireachtas to sit therein shall, whileso entitled, be disqualified from becoming a member of the staff ofthe Council.
29.—Section 28 shall, with all necessary modifications, apply to a
person who is a member of the staff of the Council who becomes amember of—
(a) a local authority, or
(b) the European Parliament,
as that section applies to a member of staff of the Council who
becomes a member of either House of the Oireachtas.
30.—(1) Any member present at a meeting where a specified
matter arises who, otherwise than in the member’s capacity as amember, has a material interest in that matter shall—
(a) at the meeting disclose to the Council or committee the
nature of that interest,
(b) withdraw from the meeting for as long as the matter is
being discussed or considered,
(c) take no part in any deliberation of the members relating
to the matter, and
(d) refrain from voting on any decision relating to the matter.
(2) Where a member discloses a material interest under this
section—
(a) the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the
meeting concerned, and
(b) for as long as the matter to which the disclosure relates is
being dealt with by the meeting, the member shall not becounted in the quorum for the meeting.
(3) Where at a meeting a question arises as to whether or not a
course of conduct, if pursued by a member, would be a failure bythe member to comply with subsection (1) —[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) the chairperson of the meeting may, subject to subsection
(4), determine the question,
(b) the chairperson’s determination is final, and
(c) the particulars of the determination shall be recorded in
the minutes of the meeting.
(4) Where the chairperson of a meeting is the member in respect
of whom a question referred to in subsection (3) arises, the other
members present at the meeting shall choose one of their number tobe the chairperson of the meeting for the purposes of that subsection.
(5) A member who, otherwise than in the member’s capacity as a
member, has a material interest in a specified matter shall neitherinfluence nor seek to influence any decision to be made by theCouncil or committee in relation to that matter.
(6) Where the Minister is satisfied that a member has failed to
comply with subsection (1) or(5), the Minister may remove that
member from office.
(7) A member removed from office under this section is not eli-
gible for appointment under this Act.
(8) In this section—
“meeting” means a meeting of the Council or of a committee;
“member” means a member of the Council or of a committee;“specified matter” means—
(a) an arrangement to which the Council is a party or a pro-
posed such arrangement, or
(b) a contract or other agreement with the Council or a pro-
posed such contract or other agreement.
31.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , a member of the staff of the
Council (including the chief executive officer) who, otherwise thanin the member’s capacity as such a member, has a material interestin a specified matter within the meaning of section 30(8) shall—
(a) disclose to the Council the nature of that interest,
(b) take no part in the negotiation of the arrangement, con-
tract or other agreement concerned or in any deliberationby the Council or its staff relating to that matter,
(c) refrain from making any recommendation relating to the
matter, and
(d) neither influence nor seek to influence a decision to be
made in relation to the matter.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to contracts or proposed con-
tracts of employment of the members of the staff of the Council withthe Council.
(3) Where a member of the staff of the Council fails to comply
with subsection (1) , the Council may—
35Pt.4 S.30
Disclosure of
interests bymembers of staff ofCouncil.Pt.4 S.31
Accounts of
Council.
Power of Council to
borrow.
Acceptance of gifts
by Council.
36[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) make such alterations to the member’s conditions of
employment as it considers appropriate, or
(b) terminate the member’s contract of employment.
PART 5
Accounts and Finances of Council
32.—(1) The Council shall keep all proper accounts of—
(a) all income and expenditure of the Council and of the
sources of such income and the subject matter of suchexpenditure, and
(b) all property, assets and liabilities of the Council.
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited at least once in
every year by the Comptroller and Auditor General.
(3) The Council shall, as soon as may be after each audit under
this section, give the Minister a copy of the accounts of the Counciland the Comptroller and Auditor General’s certificate and reportthereon.
(4) The Council shall—
(a) as soon as may be after each audit under this section, cause
the accounts of the Council and the Comptroller andAuditor General’s certificate and report thereon to beprinted, published and put on sale, and
(b) immediately after each such publication, cause a copy of
such accounts and such certificate and report thereon asso printed and published to be laid before each House ofthe Oireachtas.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed as entitling the
Comptroller and Auditor General to question—
(a) the policy objectives of the Council, or
(b) the need for or the conduct of an inquiry.
33.—(1) The Council may, with the consent of the Minister for
Finance and subject to the conditions, if any, which are imposed bythe Minister, or in accordance with the directions, if any, given bythe Minister, borrow money for capital or current purposes.
(2) Any monies borrowed by the Council pursuant to this section
and any interest accruing thereon may be secured on the revenue,funds or property of the Council.
34.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Council may accept gifts of
money, land or other property upon such trusts and conditions, ifany, as are specified by the donor.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) The Council shall not accept a gift if the conditions attached
to the acceptance by the donor are inconsistent with the functions ofthe Council.
35.—(1) All expenses incurred by the Council shall be defrayed
by the Council out of funds at the disposal of the Council.
(2) Any expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be approved by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of monies provided by the Oireachtas.
(3) The Minister may—
(a) with the consent of the Minister for Finance, arrange for
the provision of assistance to the Council, in the perform-ance of its functions under Part 11 , out of monies pro-
vided by the Oireachtas for the purpose,
(b) after consultation with the Council and with the consent
of the Minister for Finance, arrange for the provision ofassistance to the Council, in the performance of specifiedfunctions of the Council not falling under Part 11 , out of
the monies provided by the Oireachtas for the purpose.
(4) The Council may allocate, in a manner that it determines, the
surplus of any funds at its disposal to—
(a) education,
(b) research, or
(c) public purposes,
connected with the medical profession.
36.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Council may
charge such fees as may, from time to time, be determined by theCouncil for—
(a) the registration under section 46 ,47,48or49of a medi-
cal practitioner,
(b) the annual retention of the registration under section 46 ,
47,48or49, of a medical practitioner,
(c) the restoration of the registration under section 46 ,47,48
or49, or under section 80 or81, of a medical practitioner,
(d) the entry of additional qualifications of any medical prac-
titioner in the register pursuant to section 51 ,
(e) the giving to a medical practitioner of a certificate of
registration,
(f) the approval of a body under section 88(2)(a)(i)(II) or
89(3)(a)(ii) ,
(g) the annual retention of the approval of a body under
section 88(2)(a)(i)(II) or89(3)(a)(ii) ,
(h) the recognition of a body under section 91(4)(a) ,
37Pt.5 S.34
Expenses of
Council andMinister.
Fees that Council
may charge.Pt.5 S.36
Unregistered
medicalpractitioners shallnot practisemedicine.
Circumstances in
which unregisteredmedicalpractitioners maypractise medicine.
38[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(i) the annual retention of the recognition of a body under
section 91(4)(a) ,
(j) the grant of a licence referred to in section 106 ,
(k) any other service which the Council may, from time to
time, provide.
(2) The Council shall not charge a fee for the registration, or the
restoration of the registration, of a medical practitioner in the Visit-ing EEA Practitioners Division.
(3) The Council shall not charge a fee for any matter referred
to in subsection (1)(f) to(i)except with the consent in writing of
the Minister.
PART 6
Registration of Medical Practitioners
37.—Subject to section 38 , an unregistered medical practitioner
shall not—
(a) practise medicine, or
(b) subject to section 50 , advertise the practitioner’s services
as a medical practitioner.
38.—A medical practitioner does not contravene section 37(a) if—
(a) the practitioner is a dentist registered under the Dentists
Act 1985 who only practises medicine in the course of,and for the purpose of, the lawful practise of dentistry,
(b) the practitioner is a person registered under the Nurses
Act 1985 who only practises medicine in the course of,and for the purposes of, the lawful practise of nursingor midwifery,
(c) the practitioner is a registered pharmaceutical chemist or
a registered dispensing chemist and druggist, under thePharmacy Acts 1875 to 1977, who only practises medicinein the course of, and for the purposes of, the lawful prac-tise of pharmacy in accordance with those Acts,
(d) the practitioner is a person registered under the Health
and Social Care Professionals Act 2005 to practise a pro-fession designated under that Act who only practisesmedicine in the course of, and for the purposes of, thelawful practise of that profession,
(e) the practitioner only practises medicine in the course of
rendering first aid to a person,
(f) the practitioner only practises medicine in the State pursu-
ant to the provisions of section 50 ,o r
(g) the practitioner only practises medicine in any combi-
nation of any of the circumstances specified in paragraphs
(a)to(f).[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
39.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) ,(3)and (4), the Minister may,
after consulting the Council or pursuant to a recommendation of theCouncil, make regulations to designate for the purposes of this Actany title (including variants thereof and any combination of letters)to be used by any registered medical practitioner, or a class of regis-tered medical practitioners, as specified in the regulations.
(2) The Minister shall not exercise the power under subsection (1)
to designate for the purposes of this Act a title unless—
(a) the Minister has given interested persons, organisations
and other bodies an opportunity to make representationsto the Minister concerning the proposed designation,
(b) subject to subsection (3) , the Minister considers that it is
appropriate and in the public interest that the title be sodesignated, and
(c) the regulations made in exercise of that power provide that
a person who was, immediately before the commence-ment of the regulations, lawfully using the title but who,on that commencement, would contravene section 40(2)
if the person continued to use the title, may continue touse the title for the period specified in the regulations(being a period reasonable in the circumstances but, inany case, not less that 6 months) without contraveningthat section.
(3) The Minister shall, in considering for the purposes of subsec-
tion (2)(b) whether it is appropriate and in the public interest that a
specific title be designated for the purposes of this Act, have regardto—
(a) the extent to which any class of medical practitioners has,
in the opinion of the Council, a defined scope of practiceand applies a distinct and recognised body of knowledge,
(b) the degree of risk to the health, safety or welfare of the
public from the incompetent, unethical or impaired prac-tice of any class of medical practitioners, and
(c) any other factor that the Minister considers relevant.
(4) The Minister shall not make regulations under this section
unless—
(a) a draft of the proposed regulations has been laid before
the Houses of the Oireachtas, and
(b) a resolution approving the draft has been passed by each
such House.
40.—(1) A registered medical practitioner shall not use a title des-
ignated for the purposes of this Act pursuant to regulations madeunder section 39(1) unless—
(a) the regulations specify that the title may be used by any
registered medical practitioner, or
39Pt.6
Designated titles.
Use of designated
titles.Pt.6 S.40
Offences and
penalties.
40[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(b) the practitioner falls within the class of registered medical
practitioners that the regulations specify may use thetitle.
(2) Subject to section 39(2)(c) , a person shall not use a title
referred to in subsection (1) unless entitled by virtue of that subsec-
tion to use the title.
41.—(1) A person is guilty of an offence if the person—
(a) contravenes section 37(a) or(b)or40(2) ,
(b) falsely represents to be a registered medical practitioner,
or
(c) being a registered medical practitioner, falsely represents
to be registered in a division of the register other thanthe division in which the person is registered.
(2) A person is guilty of an offence if the person causes or permits
another person to make representations about the first-mentionedperson that, if made by the first-mentioned person, would be anoffence under subsection (1) .
(3) A person is guilty of an offence if the person, with intent to
deceive, makes with regard to another person any representationthat—
(a) the first-mentioned person knows to be false, and
(b) if made by the other person would be an offence by the
other person under subsection (1) .
(4) A person is guilty of an offence if the person makes or causes
to be made any false declaration or misrepresentation for the pur-pose of obtaining registration.
(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or both,
(b) on conviction on indictment—
(i) in the case of a first offence, to a fine not exceeding
\130,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 5 years or both,
(ii) in the case of any subsequent offence, to a fine not
exceeding \320,000 or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 10 years or both.
(6) It shall be a defence in proceedings for an offence under sub-
section (1)(a) or(2)for the person charged with the offence to prove
that the person took all reasonable steps to avoid the commission ofthe offence.
(7) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this section,
the court recording the conviction shall, unless it is satisfied thatthere are special and substantial reasons for not doing so, order theperson to pay to the prosecution the costs and expenses, measured[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
by the court, incurred by the prosecution in relation to the pros-
ecution of the offence.
42.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , an unregistered medical prac-
titioner shall not be entitled to charge or recover fees or outlaysfor medical services provided by the practitioner in the course ofpractising medicine.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to—
(a) medical services provided by an unregistered medical
practitioner at a time when the practitioner was a regis-tered medical practitioner, or
(b) medical services provided by an unregistered medical
practitioner to the extent that they were provided in anyof the circumstances specified in any of paragraphs (a) to
(g)ofsection 38 .
43.—(1) The Council shall establish and maintain a register to be
known as the register of medical practitioners.
(2) The register shall contain the names of the medical prac-
titioners registered, and the qualifications they are entitled to haveregistered, under this Act and shall consist of 4 divisionscomprising—
(a) the General Division, which shall include the names of
those medical practitioners registered in that divisionpursuant to section 46 and such other identifying part-
iculars of those practitioners as the Council considersappropriate,
(b) the Specialist Division, which shall include the names of
those medical practitioners registered in that divisionpursuant to section 47 and such other identifying part-
iculars of those practitioners as the Council considersappropriate,
(c) the Trainee Specialist Division, which shall include the
names of those medical practitioners registered in thatdivision pursuant to section 48 or49and such other iden-
tifying particulars of those practitioners as the Councilconsiders appropriate, and
(d) the Visiting EEA Practitioners Division, which shall
include the names of those medical practitioners regis-tered in that division pursuant to section 50 and such
other identifying particulars of those practitioners as theCouncil considers appropriate.
(3) The register may be established and maintained in paper or
electronic form.
(4) A certificate purporting to be signed by the chief executive
officer, or another member of the staff of the Council authorised bythe chief executive officer to give a certificate under this subsection,and to certify that on a specified day or days or during the whole ofa specified period—
(a) a person named in the certificate—
41Pt.6 S.41
Recovery of fees,
etc.
Register.Pt.6 S.43
42[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(i) was a registered medical practitioner,
(ii) was a registered medical practitioner in the General
Division, the Specialist Division, the TraineeSpecialist Division or the Visiting EEA PractitionersDivision, or
(iii) was not a registered medical practitioner,
or
(b) the registration of a medical practitioner named in the
certificate—
(i) was suspended, or
(ii) was subject to the relevant conditions specified in
the certificate,
shall, without proof of the signature of the person purporting to sign
the certificate or that the person was the chief executive officer oranother member of the staff of the Council so authorised, as the casemay be, be evidence, unless the contrary is proved, of the mattersstated in the certificate.
(5) The Council shall, as soon as is practicable after a medical
practitioner has been registered and the appropriate fees paid, givethe practitioner a certificate stating—
(a) the practitioner’s name,
(b) the registration number attached to the practitioner’s
registration,
(c) the division of the register in which the practitioner’s name
has been included, and
(d) such other identifying particulars of the practitioner as the
Council considers appropriate.
(6) Where relevant conditions have been attached to the regis-
tration of a practitioner, the Council shall enter in the register—
(a) a statement that the practitioner’s registration is subject to
conditions, and
(b) particulars of the conditions.
(7) A registered medical practitioner shall, as soon as may be after
the practitioner has received the certificate referred to in subsection
(5)and if it is practicable to do so, cause the certificate to be
displayed—
(a) at the principal place where the practitioner practises
medicine, and
(b) at all times during which the practitioner’s registration
continues and at no other time.
(8) A registered medical practitioner shall, as soon as may be after
the person has received the certificate referred to in subsection (5) ,
cause the registration number stated on that certificate to beincluded on all medical prescriptions and all other documentation[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
and records, whether in paper or electronic format, relating to that
practitioner’s practice as a registered medical practitioner.
44.—(1) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by
section 3 —
(a) the General Register of Medical Practitioners, as that
Register was in force immediately before the commence-ment of section 3 , shall, subject to subsection (2) ,b e
deemed to be the General Division until the registerestablishment day, and the other provisions of this Act(including the definition of “General Division” in section
2and the provisions relating to the inclusion in, or the
deletion of, names from the register) shall apply to thatRegister accordingly, and
(b) the Register of Medical Specialists, as that Register was in
force immediately before the commencement of section
3, shall be deemed to be the Specialist Division until the
register establishment day, and the other provisions ofthis Act (including the definition of “Specialist Division”insection 2 and the provisions relating to the inclusion
in, or the deletion of, names from the register) shall applyto that Register accordingly.
(2) Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (3) , a medical
practitioner whose name is entered in the General Register of Medi-cal Practitioners pursuant to—
(a) section 28 (as substituted by section 6 of the Act of 2002)
of the Act of 1978, or
(b) section 29 (as amended by section 7 of the Act of 2002) of
the Act of 1978,
may, for so long as the practitioner’s name is so entered, only practise
medicine pursuant to that registration subject to the same conditionsthat were applicable to the practise of medicine by that practitionerimmediately before the commencement of section 3 .
(3) Where the Council gives the Minister a notice in writing stat-
ing the date on which the Council will be ready to administer theregister, the Minister shall publish a notice in Iris Oifigiu ´ilspecifying
that date as the date on which the register comes into operation.
(4) The Council shall ensure that, on the register establishment
day—
(a) subject to paragraphs (c) to(i), the name of a medical
practitioner whose name is entered in the General Regis-ter of Medical Practitioners immediately before that dayis entered in the General Division,
(b) subject to paragraphs (c) to(i), the name of a medical
practitioner whose name is entered in the Register ofMedical Specialists immediately before that day isentered in the Specialist Division,
(c) the name of a medical practitioner whose name is entered
in both the General Register of Medical Practitioners andthe Register of Medical Specialists immediately beforethat day is only entered in the Specialist Division,
43Pt.6 S.43
Transitional
provisionsapplicable toregister.Pt.6 S.44
44[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(d) the name of a medical practitioner whose name is entered
in the General Register of Medical Practitioners immedi-ately before that day pursuant to section 28 (as substi-tuted by section 6 of the Act of 2002) of the Act of 1978is entered in the Trainee Specialist Division,
(e) the name of a medical practitioner—
(i) whose name is entered in the General Register of
Medical Practitioners or the Register of MedicalSpecialists, or both, immediately before that day, and
(ii) who practises medicine in an individually numbered,
identifiable post which has been approved by theCouncil for the purpose of medical specialisttraining,
is only entered in the Trainee Specialist Division,
(f) the name of a medical practitioner whose name is entered
in the General Register of Medical Practitioners immedi-ately before that day pursuant to section 29 (as amendedby section 7 of the Act of 2002) of the Act of 1978 is onlyentered in the Trainee Specialist Division,
(g) subject to subsection (5) , where any conditions were,
immediately before that day, attached to the registrationof any medical practitioner whose name is entered in theGeneral Register of Medical Practitioners or the Registerof Medical Specialists immediately before that day, thereis entered in the register—
(i) a statement that the practitioner’s registration is sub-
ject to conditions, and
(ii) particulars of the conditions,
(h) where immediately before that day and pursuant to Part
V of the Act of 1978 the registration of the name of amedical practitioner entered in the General Register ofMedical Practitioners or the Register of Medical Special-ists immediately before that day had no effect for theduration of a specified period which expires on a dateafter the register establishment day, there is entered inthe register—
(i) a statement that the practitioner’s registration has no
effect for the time being, and
(ii) a statement as to the date on which the practitioner’s
registration will (barring any further sanctions beingimposed under this Act on the practitioner) onceagain have effect,
and
(i) no medical practitioner is registered in more than one div-
ision of the register except that a medical practitionerwho is registered in the Specialist Division may also beregistered in the Trainee Specialist Division if, and onlyif, the practitioner is undergoing specialist training in amedical specialty other than the medical specialty in[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
respect of which the practitioner is registered in the
Specialist Division.
(5) The Council is not required to comply with subsection (4)(g)
in the case of conditions referred to in that subsection attached to theregistration of a medical practitioner referred to in that subsection if
the Council is satisfied that the division of the register in which thepractitioner is registered makes those conditions redundant.
(6) Nothing in this section shall of itself operate to prevent a
medical practitioner registered in the Specialist Division from prac-tising medicine as if the practitioner were registered in the GeneralDivision.
45.—(1) A medical practitioner may make an application to the
Council, accompanied by the appropriate fee or fees, to beregistered.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) and sections 46 ,47,48,49,50,53and
54(4) , the Council shall determine an application under subsection
(1)from a medical practitioner by registering the practitioner in that
division of the register which is considered by the Council to beappropriate.
(3) Subject to section 44(4)(i) , the Council shall not register a
medical practitioner in more than one division of the register.
(4) Subject to subsection (5) , the Council shall determine an appli-
cation to be registered under the terms of Directive 2005/36/EC—
(a) subject to paragraph (b) , as soon as is possible after it
receives all the documents required to determine theapplication, but
(b) in any event, not later than 3 months after the date on
which it receives the last of those documents.
(5) Where the Council has a reasonable and justified doubt in
relation to an application referred to in subsection (4) from a person,
it may require of a competent authority of a Member State—
(a) confirmation of the authenticity of diplomas, certificates
and other evidence of formal qualifications issued in theMember State and referred to in Articles 21, 23 and 50of Directive 2005/36/EC,
(b) confirmation that the person has fulfilled the minimum
training requirements specified in Article 23 or, as thecase requires, Article 24 or 25 of Directive 2005/36/EC.
(6) The Council shall, in considering an application referred to in
subsection (4) from a person, take into account any relevant training
undergone or experience gained by the person in a third country.
(7) For the avoidance of doubt, it is declared that the Council
shall not register a medical practitioner pursuant to section 46 ,47,48
or49unless the practitioner has made an application under subsec-
tion (1) .
45Pt.6 S.44
Registration of
medicalpractitioners —general.Pt.6
Medical
practitioners to beregistered inGeneral Division.
Medical
practitioners to beregistered inSpecialist Division.
46[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
46.—The Council shall register in the General Division a medical
practitioner (other than a visiting EEA practitioner)—
(a) who is not able to be registered—
(i) in the Specialist Division pursuant to section 47 ,o r
(ii) in the Trainee Specialist Division pursuant to section
48or49,
and
(b) who—
(i) has passed an examination, specified in rules made
under section 11 for the purposes of this subpara-
graph, for the purposes of registration in theGeneral Division,
(ii) is exempted from subparagraph (i) by virtue of falling
within a ground, specified in rules made undersection 11 for the purposes of this subparagraph, for
such exemption,
(iii) is a national of a Member State who has been
awarded a qualification in medicine or a certificateof acquired rights by a competent body or authoritydesignated for that purpose by a Member State, pur-suant to Directive 2005/36/EC, or
(iv) subject to rules made under section 11 which apply
to this subparagraph, has been granted a documentwhich, in the opinion of the Council, is at least theequivalent of a certificate of experience.
47.—(1) The Council shall, in accordance with the relevant
criteria specified in rules made under section 11 , register in the
Specialist Division the following medical practitioners:
(a) every medical practitioner who has, in the opinion of the
Council, completed specialist training in a medicalspecialty recognised by the Council under section 89(1) ;
(b) every medical practitioner who is granted evidence of
satisfactory completion of specialist training by a bodyapproved under section 89(3)(a)(ii) ;
(c) every national of the State or a Member State who pos-
sesses a degree, diploma or other evidence of formalqualification in specialised medicine recognised by theCouncil and awarded by a competent body or authoritydesignated for that purpose by a Member State, pursuantto Directive 2005/36/EC;
(d) every national of the State or a Member State who pos-
sesses a certificate of acquired rights in specialised medi-cine awarded by a competent body or authority desig-nated for that purpose by a Member State, pursuant toDirective 2005/36/EC;
(e) every national of the State or a Member State who pos-
sesses a degree, diploma, certificate or other evidence of[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
formal qualification in specialised medicine awarded in a
third country and certified by a competent body or auth-ority designated for that purpose by a Member State, pur-suant to Directive 2005/36/EC; or
(f) any medical practitioner who satisfies the Council that the
practitioner has completed a programme of training andhas acquired sufficient experience in specialised medicineof a standard considered by the Council to be adequatefor the purposes of registration in the Specialist Division.
(2) The Council may, until the 5th anniversary of the commence-
ment of this subsection, grant registration in any particular list of theSpecialist Division to any medical practitioner who, being able tobe registered in the General Division, satisfies the Council that thepractitioner has obtained sufficient training and experience such thatthe practitioner should be registered as a specialist in that list.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) , the Council shall, until the
5th anniversary of the commencement of that subsection, work withthe bodies approved under section 89(3)(a) to assist medical prac-
titioners registered in the General Division to achieve the necessarystandard for registration in the Specialist Division.
48.—(1) The Council shall register in the Trainee Specialist Div-
ision a medical practitioner who—
(a) has been granted a certificate of experience, and
(b) practises medicine in an individually numbered, identifi-
able post which has been approved by the Council for thepurpose of medical specialist training.
(2) The Council shall register in the Trainee Specialist Division a
medical practitioner who is a national of a Member State and—
(a) has been awarded a qualification in medicine or a certifi-
cate of acquired rights by a competent body or authoritydesignated for that purpose by a Member State, pursuantto Directive 2005/36/EC,
(b) practises medicine in an individually numbered, identifi-
able post which has been approved by the Council for thepurpose of medical specialist training, and
(c) subject to rules made under section 11 which apply to this
paragraph, has been granted in a Member State a docu-ment which, in the opinion of the Council, is at least theequivalent of a certificate of experience.
(3) The Council shall register in the Trainee Specialist Division a
medical practitioner who is a national of a Member State who doesnot fall within subsection (1) or(2), or who is a national of a third
country, and—
(a) either—
(i) has passed an examination, specified in rules made
under section 11 for the purposes of this subpara-
graph, for the purposes of registration in the TraineeSpecialist Division, or
47Pt.6 S.47
Medical
practitioners to beregistered inTrainee SpecialistDivision.Pt.6 S.48
Internship
registration inTrainee SpecialistDivision.
48[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(ii) is exempted from subparagraph (i) by virtue of falling
within a ground, specified in rules made undersection 11 for the purposes of this subparagraph, for
such exemption,
(b) practises medicine in an individually numbered, identifi-
able post which has been approved by the Council for thepurpose of medical specialist training, and
(c) subject to rules made under section 11 which apply to this
paragraph, has been granted in a third country a docu-ment which, in the opinion of the Council, is at least theequivalent of a certificate of experience.
(4) The Council shall register in the Trainee Specialist Division
a medical practitioner who has been granted refugee status in theState and—
(a) either—
(i) has passed an examination, specified in rules made
under section 11 for the purposes of this subpara-
graph, for the purposes of registration in the TraineeSpecialist Division, or
(ii) is exempted from subparagraph (i) by virtue of falling
within a ground, specified in rules made undersection 11 for the purposes of this subparagraph, for
such exemption,
(b) practises medicine in an individually numbered, identifi-
able post which has been approved by the Council for thepurpose of medical specialist training, and
(c) satisfies any other requirements, specified in rules made
under section 11 , for the purposes of this paragraph.
(5) A medical practitioner who is registered in the Trainee
Specialist Division but who ceases to practise medicine in an indi-vidually numbered, identifiable post which has been approved by theCouncil for the purpose of medical specialist training shall, as soonas is practicable after so ceasing to practise medicine but, in any case,not later than 14 days after so ceasing to practise medicine, givenotice in writing to the Council of that fact.
(6) Where—
(a) the Council receives a notice under subsection (5) from a
medical practitioner, or
(b) a medical practitioner fails to comply with subsection (5) ,
sections 45(3) and 46shall apply to and in relation to the Council
and the practitioner.
49.—(1) The Council shall register in the Trainee Specialist Div-
ision a medical practitioner who has completed a course of study inthe State or a Member State resulting in the award of a basic medicalqualification and who intends to practise medicine in an individuallynumbered, identifiable intern post which has been approved by theCouncil for the purposes of intern training.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , on and after the relevant day, where
a medical practitioner has completed a period of internship to thesatisfaction of the Council, the Council shall grant the practitioner acertificate of experience.
(3) The Council shall not grant under subsection (2) a certificate
of experience to a medical practitioner unless the Council is satisfiedthat the practitioner has, for the period or periods specified in rulesmade under section 11 for the purposes of this subsection, been
employed as a medical practitioner—
(a) in a hospital, health institution, clinic, general medical
practice, or other health service setting, as is specifiedin rules made under section 11 for the purposes of this
subsection, and
(b) such hospital, health institution, clinic, general medical
practice, or other health service setting, as the case maybe, has been inspected and approved by the Council foracceptable intern training standards.
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by section 3 ,
section 28 of the Act of 1978 shall, until the relevant day, and withall necessary modifications, apply to the grant of a certificate ofexperience under this Act as it applies to the grant of a certificate ofexperience under the Act of 1978.
(5) Where the Council gives the Minister a notice in writing stat-
ing the date on which the Council will be ready to grant certificatesof experience, the Minister shall publish a notice in Iris Oifigiu ´il
specifying that date as the date on which the Council shall commenceto grant such certificates.
(6) In this section, “relevant day” means the date specified in the
notice referred to in subsection (5) published in Iris Oifigiu ´ilas the
date on which the Council shall commence to grant certificates ofexperience.
50.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (7), a medical practitioner
who is a national of a Member State and lawfully established in medi-cal practice in a Member State (by virtue of being registered orlicensed to practise medicine by a competent authority of a MemberState that is the last-mentioned Member State’s equivalent to theCouncil) may, on visiting the State—
(a) practise medicine on a temporary and occasional basis
without first being registered, and
(b) advertise the practitioner’s services as a medical prac-
titioner for the purposes of paragraph (a) .
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , a visiting EEA practitioner shall,
before practising medicine in the State and thereafter on an annualbasis, give to the Council a declaration in writing—
(a) giving particulars of the medical services to be rendered
and the period or periods in which the practitionerexpects to render them, and
(b) accompanied by the following documents in the case of
the first such declaration (and thereafter only if there is
49Pt.6 S.49
Visiting EEA
practitionersproviding serviceson temporary andoccasional basis.Pt.6 S.50
Registration of
additionalqualifications.
50[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
a material change in the situation substantiated by such
documents):
(i) proof of the nationality of the practitioner; and
(ii) an attestation from the relevant competent authority
(being the authority or body designated by theMember State concerned as competent for the pur-poses of Article 56 of Directive 2005/36/EC) certify-ing that the practitioner is—
(I) lawfully established in a Member State for the
purpose of practising medicine, and
(II) not prohibited from practising medicine, even
temporarily, at the moment of delivering theattestation.
(3) The Council may, in respect of a visiting EEA practitioner
who has made a declaration pursuant to subsection (2) , request any
competent authority of the Member State in which the practitioneris established as mentioned in subsection (2)(b)(ii)(I) , for each pro-
vision of medical services specified in the declaration, to provide anyinformation relevant to the legality of the practitioner’s establish-ment and the practitioner’s good conduct and the absence of anydisciplinary or criminal sanctions of a professional nature.
(4) A visiting EEA practitioner may give to the Council the docu-
ments referred to in subsection (2)(b) after the practitioner has
rendered any medical services specified in a declaration referred toinsubsection (2) given by the practitioner to the Council where the
provision of those services was urgently required but, in any case,not more than 15 days after the date on which the services wereprovided.
(5) The temporary and occasional nature of the proposed pro-
vision of medical services by a visiting EEA practitioner shall be
assessed by the Council on a case by case basis, in particular inrelation to its duration, its frequency, its regularity and its continuity.
(6) Where a visiting EEA practitioner complies with the require-
ments of subsection (2) , the Council shall—
(a) register the practitioner in the Visiting EEA Practitioners
Division, and
(b) enter in the register the particulars referred to in subsec-
tion (2)(a) contained in the practitioner’s declaration
made pursuant to subsection (2) .
(7) A visiting EEA practitioner shall not practise medicine in the
State otherwise than in accordance with a declaration made by thepractitioner under subsection (2)(a) or in a case of urgency.
51.—(1) A registered medical practitioner may make an appli-
cation, accompanied by the appropriate fee, to the Council to havea qualification acquired by the practitioner and which falls withinsubsection (2) entered in the register in addition to the practitioner’s
qualifications already entered therein.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) The Council shall determine the qualifications, not being
qualifications required for the purposes of registration, which maybe entered in the register as additional qualifications.
(3) Where the Council enters in the register an additional qualifi-
cation acquired by a medical practitioner, the Council shall, as soonas is practicable thereafter, give the practitioner a certificate statingthat the additional qualification has been entered in the register.
52.—(1) A registered medical practitioner may make an appli-
cation to the Council to have the practitioner’s registration removed.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the Council shall determine an appli-
cation under subsection (1) from a registered medical practitioner by
removing the practitioner’s registration.
(3) Where the Council receives an application under subsection
(1)from a registered medical practitioner and—
(a) the practitioner is the subject of a complaint which has not
been disposed of or otherwise dealt with under Part 7
and, if applicable, Parts 8 and 9,o r
(b) the practitioner has been convicted in the State of an
offence triable on indictment or has been convicted out-side the State of an offence consisting of acts or omissionswhich would constitute an offence triable on indictmentif done or made in the State,
then the Council shall not consider the application until such time as
the Council has decided whether or not the practitioner’s registrationshould be removed (including cancelled) pursuant to another pro-vision of this Act.
(4) A medical practitioner whose registration has been removed
pursuant to subsection (2) may make an application, accompanied by
the appropriate fee, to the Council to have the practitioner’s regis-tration restored.
(5) The Council shall determine an application under subsection
(4) from a medical practitioner by restoring the practitioner’s
registration.
(6) Where the Council is satisfied by medical evidence that a
registered medical practitioner is suffering from an illness or con-dition of a permanent or terminal nature which, due to the nature ofthe condition, renders it impossible for the practitioner—
(a) to practise medicine in a safe and competent manner, and
(b) to notify the Council of the practitioner’s illness or con-
dition, as the case may be,
then the Council may remove the practitioner’s registration.
53.—(1) A medical practitioner making an application for regis-
tration shall declare in the application whether the practitioner hasany relevant medical disability.
(2) Where the Council is satisfied that—
51Pt.6 S.51
Application to have
registrationremoved, etc.
Conditions attached
to first registration.Pt.6 S.53
Refusal of
registration, etc.,and appeal to Courtagainst Council’sdecision.
52[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) a medical practitioner making an application for regis-
tration has a relevant medical disability, and
(b) in the interests of public safety, registration should only be
granted to the practitioner subject to conditions on thepractising of medicine by the practitioner which takeaccount of that disability,
the Council shall specify the conditions (in this section referred to as
the “proposed conditions”) which, in the opinion of the Council, arenecessary to be attached to the registration of the practitioner inthose interests.
(3) Where the medical practitioner the subject of a decision under
subsection (2) agrees in writing to the attachment of the proposed
conditions to the practitioner’s registration, the Council shall registerthe practitioner and at the same time comply with section 43(6) in
respect of the conditions.
54.—(1) Nothing in sections 45 to53shall operate to prevent the
Council from refusing to register or restore the registration of amedical practitioner on the grounds of the unfitness of the prac-titioner to practise medicine.
(2) Where the Council makes a decision—
(a) under subsection (1) to refuse to register or restore the
registration of a medical practitioner,
(b) to register a medical practitioner in a division of the regis-
ter other than the division specified in the practitioner’sapplication under section 45 for registration, or
(c) to attach conditions to the registration of a medical prac-
titioner pursuant to section 53 ,
the Council shall forthwith give notice in writing to the practitioner
of the decision, the date of the decision and the reasons for thedecision.
(3) A medical practitioner the subject of a decision referred to in
subsection (2) may, not later than 3 months after the date on which
the practitioner was given notice of the decision pursuant to thatsubsection, appeal to the Court against the decision.
(4) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(3)by a medical practitioner—
(a) either—
(i) confirm the decision the subject of the appeal, or
(ii) cancel that decision and replace it with such other
decision as the Court considers appropriate, whichmay be a decision—
(I) to register or restore the registration of the prac-
titioner in such division of the register as theCourt considers appropriate and with no con-ditions attached to the registration, or[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(II) to register or restore the registration of the
practitioner—
(A) in such division of the register as the Court
considers appropriate, and
(B) with such conditions attached to that regis-
tration as the Court considers appropriate,
and
(b) give the Council such directions as the Court considers
appropriate and direct how the costs of the appeal are tobe borne.
(5) The Council shall, on complying with a direction given by the
Court under subsection (4) , give notice in writing to the medical prac-
titioner concerned of the Council’s compliance with the direction.
55.—(1) For the purpose of keeping the register correct, the
Council shall from time to time as occasion requires correct all cleri-cal errors in the register, remove therefrom all entries therein pro-cured by fraud or misrepresentation, enter in the register everychange which comes to the Council’s knowledge in the addresses ofthe registered medical practitioners, and remove the registration ofall registered medical practitioners whose death has been notified to,or comes to the knowledge of, the Council.
(2) Where the Council takes any action pursuant to subsection (1)
for the purposes of keeping the register correct, the Council shallforthwith notify the medical practitioner concerned, or the prac-titioner’s next of kin, as may be appropriate, of the action taken andof the reasons therefor.
(3) The Council shall take such steps as it considers necessary
from time to time to ensure that the particulars entered in the regis-ter are accurate.
(4) Where any particulars entered in the register in respect of a
registered medical practitioner change, the practitioner shall, as soonas is practicable but, in any case, not later than 30 days after theoccurrence of the change, give notice in writing to the Council speci-fying the change.
(5) Where a registered medical practitioner intends to be, or has
been, absent from the State for a continuous period of more than 12months, the practitioner shall, as soon as is practicable, give noticein writing to the Council—
(a) of that fact, and
(b) of particulars of any employment that the practitioner
intends to take up, or has taken up, outside the State ina medical capacity.
(6) A registered medical practitioner shall give notice in writing
to the Council of any material matter which would be likely to affectthe continuation of the practitioner’s registration not later than 30days after that matter comes to the knowledge of the practitioner.
(7) In subsection (6) , “material matter”, in relation to a registered
medical practitioner, includes—
53Pt.6 S.54
Correction of
register.Pt.6 S.55
Publication of
register.
Complaints
concerningregistered medicalpractitioners.
54[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) the imposition of conditions on any registration or licence,
(b) the suspension, withdrawal or removal of any registration
or licence, or
(c) the refusal to grant registration or a licence,
in relation to any regulatory body in or outside the State, and any
medical capacity of the practitioner, and includes any conviction ofa criminal nature whether imposed in or outside the State.
56.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Council shall ensure that
the register is published in the prescribed manner.
(2) The Council need not make available for inspection or publish
the residential addresses, home telephone numbers or e-mailaddresses of registered medical practitioners or other similar detailsthat, in its opinion, should, in the interests of the security of thepractitioners, be protected from disclosure.
PART 7
Complaints to Preliminary Proceedings Committee concerning
registered medical practitioners
57.—(1) A person (including the Council) may make a complaint
to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee concerning a registeredmedical practitioner on one or more than one of the grounds of—
(a) professional misconduct,
(b) poor professional performance,
(c) a relevant medical disability,
(d) a failure to comply with a relevant condition,
(e) a failure to comply with an undertaking or to take any
action specified in a consent given in response to arequest under section 67(1) ,
(f) a contravention of a provision of this Act (including a pro-
vision of any regulations or rules made under this Act), or
(g) a conviction in the State for an offence triable on indict-
ment or a conviction outside the State for an offence con-sisting of acts or omissions that, if done or made in theState, would constitute an offence triable on indictment.
(2) A complaint may be made on the grounds of professional mis-
conduct or poor professional performance notwithstanding that thematter to which the complaint relates occurred outside the State.
(3) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall make reason-
able efforts to ensure that—
(a) the complainant is kept informed of all decisions made
under this Part and, if applicable, Parts 8 and 9by the
Committee, any other committee, or the Council, inrelation to the complaint concerned,[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(b) the Committee acts expeditiously, and
(c) complaints are processed in a timely manner.
(4) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee may use the services
of a person appointed under section 58 in relation to the investigation
of a complaint.
(5) Where a complaint falls within subsection (1)(g) , the Prelimi-
nary Proceedings Committee shall immediately refer the complaintto the Council.
(6) The Council shall consider a complaint referred to it under
subsection (5) and—
(a) if it is of the opinion that—
(i) the nature of the offence that is the subject of the
complaint or the circumstances in which the offencewas committed render the practitioner permanentlyunfit to continue to practise medicine, and
(ii) it is in the public interest that it take action immedi-
ately under this paragraph,
the Council shall decide under section 71 to impose on
the practitioner the sanction referred to in section 71(f)
as if the complaint were a report referred to in section
69(1) of the Fitness to Practise Committee in relation to
the complaint, and the other provisions of Part 9 (except
section 72(2) ) shall apply to that decision accordingly,
(b) in any other case, shall refer the complaint back to the
Preliminary Proceedings Committee and direct the Com-mittee to deal with the complaint as if the complaint hadnever been so referred.
(7) Nothing in subsection (6) shall be construed to—
(a) prejudice the generality of section 60 ,o r
(b) limit the range of the sanctions which the Council may
decide to impose under section 71 on a registered medical
practitioner in any case where the Council has taken theaction referred to in subsection (6)(b) .
(8) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall refuse to con-
sider or further consider a complaint in respect of a matter whichoccurred before the commencement of section 3 if the matter was
the subject of an application under section 45 of the Act of 1978.
(9) A complaint is a protected disclosure under the Health Act
2004 (as amended by the Health Act 2007 ).
58.—(1) The Council—
(a) may appoint persons (including any members of the staff
of the Council other than the chief executive officer) toassist the Preliminary Proceedings Committee, and
(b) shall determine the conditions of appointment of persons
so appointed.
55Pt.7 S.57
Persons to assist
PreliminaryProceedingsCommittee.Pt.7 S.58
56[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , the chairperson of the Preliminary
Proceedings Committee shall specify the functions to be performedby the persons appointed under subsection (1) .
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) , the func-
tions specified under that subsection may include one or more thanone of the following:
(a) interviewing persons for the purposes of assessing the rel-
evance or evidential value of information or documentsthey wish to give to the Preliminary ProceedingsCommittee;
(b) interviewing persons as to the evidence they propose to
give to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee;
(c) recording, in writing or otherwise, the statements given
and answers made by persons whilst being sointerviewed;
(d) reporting to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee on
the results of those interviews;
(e) requesting persons to provide the Preliminary Proceedings
Committee with statements in writing concerning anymatter relevant to the Committee’s functions and exam-ining statements given in response to the requests; and
(f) providing the Preliminary Proceedings Committee with
any other advice or assistance required in relation to thepreparation of its reports.
(4) A person appointed under subsection (1) —
(a) shall not administer oaths or take affirmations, but
(b) may, if authorised by the Preliminary Proceedings Com-
mittee to do so, request a person interviewed as describedinsubsection (3) to sign a record of a statement made or
answer given by the person during the interview.
(5) A person appointed under subsection (1) who makes a request
referred to in subsection (4)(b) shall inform the person to whom the
request is made of the power under section 66 of the Fitness to Prac-
tise Committee to give a direction in relation to the statement oranswer the subject of the request.
(6) The Council shall provide each person appointed under sub-
section (1) with a warrant—
(a) identifying the person, and
(b) specifying the functions that the person has the authority
to perform by virtue of subsection (2) and, if applicable,
subsections (4)(b) and (5).
(7) Where a person appointed under subsection (1) performs a
function specified in that person’s warrant provided under subsection
(6), the person shall produce the warrant for inspection at the
request of a person in respect of whom the function is performed.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
59.—(1) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall, as soon
as is practicable after receiving a complaint, consider whether thereis sufficient cause to warrant further action being taken in relationto the complaint.
(2) Where the Preliminary Proceedings Committee considers that
a complaint is proper to the procedures of another body or authority,including any scheme which may be in place pursuant to Part 9 ofthe Health Act 2004, it may inform the complainant of its view thatthe complaint is proper to such other procedures.
(3) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee may, by notice in
writing given to a complainant, do one or more than one of thefollowing:
(a) require the complainant to verify, by affidavit or other-
wise, anything contained in the complaint;
(b) request the complainant to supply to the Committee,
within a reasonable period specified in the notice, moreinformation relating to the matter the subject of thecomplaint;
(c) require that information requested under paragraph (b) be
supplied by the complainant by means of a statutory dec-laration.
(4) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee may refuse to con-
sider or further consider a complaint if the complainant, withoutreasonable excuse, does not comply with a notice under subsection
(3)given to the complainant.
(5) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall give notice in
writing to the registered medical practitioner the subject of a com-plaint of the complaint, its nature and the name of the complainant.
(6) The registered medical practitioner the subject of a complaint
may supply to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee any infor-mation that the practitioner believes should be considered by the
Committee or the Fitness to Practise Committee.
(7) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee may, by notice in
writing given to a registered medical practitioner the subject of acomplaint, require the practitioner to supply the Committee, withina reasonable period specified in the notice, with such informationrelating to the complaint as is specified in the notice.
(8) A registered medical practitioner shall comply with a notice
under subsection (7) given to the practitioner.
(9) The Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall, before forming
an opinion on whether there is sufficient cause to warrant furtheraction being taken in relation to a complaint, or whether the com-plaint should be referred to another body or authority, consider—
(a) any information supplied under this section concerning the
complaint, and
(b) whether the complaint is trivial or vexatious or without
substance or made in bad faith.
57Pt.7
Consideration of
complaints byPreliminaryProceedingsCommittee.Pt.7 S.59
If immediate
suspension ofregistration isnecessary to protectpublic.
No further action or
referral ofcomplaint toanother body orauthority or toprofessionalcompetencescheme.
58[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(10) Where a complaint is withdrawn while it is being considered
by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee, the Committee may,with the Council’s agreement—
(a) decide that no further action is to be taken in relation to
the matter the subject of the complaint, or
(b) proceed as if the complaint had not been withdrawn.
(11) Subsections (1)(c) ,(2)(in so far as it relates to the production
of records) and (9)ofsection 66 shall apply to and in relation to
the Preliminary Proceedings Committee and the chairperson of thatCommittee as those subsections apply to and in relation to the Fit-ness to Practise Committee and the chairperson of the Fitness toPractise Committee.
60.—(1) The Council may make an ex parte application to the
Court for an order to suspend the registration of a registered medicalpractitioner, whether or not the practitioner is the subject of a com-plaint, if the Council considers that the suspension is necessary toprotect the public until steps or further steps are taken under thisPart and, if applicable, Parts 8 and 9.
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be heard otherwise
than in public unless the Court considers it appropriate to hear theapplication in public.
(3) The Court may determine an application under subsection
(1)by—
(a) making any order it considers appropriate, including an
order directing the Council to suspend the registrationof the registered medical practitioner the subject of theapplication for the period specified in the order, and
(b) giving to the Council any direction that the Court con-
siders appropriate.
(4) The Council shall, on complying with a direction of the Court
given under subsection (3) , give notice in writing to the medical prac-
titioner concerned of the Council’s compliance with the direction.
61.—(1) Where the Preliminary Proceedings Committee is, in
respect of a complaint, of the opinion that—
(a) there is not sufficient cause to warrant further action being
taken in relation to the complaint,
(b) the complaint should be referred to another body or auth-
ority or to a professional competence scheme, or
(c) the complaint is one that could be resolved by mediation
or other informal means pursuant to guidelines preparedunder section 62(1) ,
it shall inform the Council of that opinion.
(2) The Council may, after considering an opinion referred to in
subsection (1) in respect of a complaint—[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) decide that no further action is to be taken in relation to
the complaint,
(b) direct the Preliminary Proceedings Committee to refer the
complainant to another body or authority,
(c) refer the complaint to a professional competence scheme,
(d) refer the complaint for resolution by mediation or other
informal means, or
(e) if it considers it necessary to do so, direct that further
action be taken under section 63.
(3) Where the Council, in respect of a complaint, makes a
decision referred to in subsection (2)(a) or a referral referred to in
subsection (2)(b) or(d), the Council shall give notice in writing of
the decision or referral, as the case may be, to—
(a) the registered medical practitioner the subject of the com-
plaint, and
(b) the complainant in any case where the Council is not the
complainant.
62.—(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (6)and without prejudice
to the generality of section 12 , the Council may prepare guidelines
for resolving complaints by mediation or other informal means.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , guide-
lines prepared under that subsection may include provision for oneor more than one of the following:
(a) a determination to be made about whether a complaint
can be resolved by mediation or other informal means orwhether it warrants the holding of an inquiry;
(b) the persons who may attempt to mediate or otherwise
resolve the complaint;
(c) the recording of the manner in which the complaint was
resolved and of the agreement of the complainant andthe registered medical practitioner the subject of thecomplaint to the resolution;
(d) the steps to be taken (including notice to the complainant,
the registered medical practitioner the subject of thecomplaint and the Preliminary Proceedings Committee)if the complaint cannot, in the opinion of the personattempting to do so, be resolved by mediation or otherinformal means;
(e) any other matters that the Council considers necessary or
appropriate for facilitating the resolution of the com-plaint by mediation or other informal means.
(3) No attempt may be made to resolve a complaint by mediation
or other informal means without the consent of the complainant andthe registered medical practitioner the subject of the complaint.
59Pt.7 S.61
Resolution of
complaints bymediation or otherinformal means.Pt.7 S.62
Referral of
complaint to Fitnessto PractiseCommittee.
Duty to notify
registered medicalpractitioner andcomplainant orother witnesses ofreferral to, andhearing by, Fitnessto PractiseCommittee.
60[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(4) A consent given by a registered medical practitioner the sub-
ject of a complaint for the purpose of this section shall not be takenas an admission of any allegation.
(5) No answer or statement made, in the course of attempting
to resolve a complaint pursuant to the guidelines prepared undersubsection (1) , by the complainant or the registered medical prac-
titioner the subject of the complaint may—
(a) be communicated to any person other than the persons
participating in the attempt to resolve the complaint, or
(b) be used in any disciplinary, civil or criminal proceedings.
(6) The resolution of a complaint pursuant to guidelines prepared
under subsection (1) shall not include the payment by any party of
any financial compensation.
(7) The Council shall ensure that guidelines prepared by it under
subsection (1) are published in the prescribed manner.
63.—Where—
(a) the Preliminary Proceedings Committee is of the opinion
that there is a prima facie case to warrant further action
being taken in relation to a complaint, or
(b) the Council directs under section 61(2)(e) that further
action be taken under this section in relation to acomplaint,
the Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall refer the complaint to
the Fitness to Practise Committee.
PART 8
Complaints referred to Fitness to Practise Committee
64.—(1) The chief executive officer shall, as soon as is practicable
after a complaint is referred under section 63 to the Fitness to Prac-
tise Committee, give notice in writing to—
(a) the registered medical practitioner the subject of the com-
plaint of the following:
(i) the referral of the complaint to the Fitness to Prac-
tise Committee;
(ii) the nature of the matter that is to be the subject of
the inquiry, including the particulars of any evidencein support of the complaint;
(iii) the opportunity of the practitioner, or the prac-
titioner’s representative, to be present and to defendthe practitioner at the hearing; and
(iv) the opportunity for the practitioner to request that
some or all of the hearing be held otherwise than inpublic if the practitioner can show reasonable andsufficient cause;[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
and
(b) any witnesses who may be required to give evidence at an
inquiry (including, where appropriate, the complainant)of the opportunity of the witness to request that some orall of the hearing be held otherwise than in public if thewitness can show reasonable and sufficient cause.
(2) The chief executive officer shall give notice in writing to the
registered medical practitioner the subject of a complaint referred tothe Fitness to Practise Committee of the date, time and place of thehearing of the complaint in sufficient time for the practitioner toprepare for the hearing.
65.—(1) The Fitness to Practise Committee shall, subject to
sections 67 and 68, hear a complaint referred to it under section 63 .
(2) A hearing before the Fitness to Practise Committee shall be
held in public unless—
(a) following a notification under section 64 , the registered
medical practitioner or a witness who will be required togive evidence at the inquiry or about whom personalmatters may be disclosed at the inquiry requests theCommittee to hold all or part of the hearing otherwisethan in public, and
(b) the Committee is satisfied that it would be appropriate in
the circumstances to hold the hearing or part of the hear-ing otherwise than in public.
(3) At the hearing of a complaint before the Fitness to Practise
Committee—
(a) the chief executive officer, or any other person with leave
of the Committee, shall present the evidence in supportof the complaint,
(b) the testimony of witnesses attending the hearing shall be
given on oath, and
(c) there shall be a full right to cross-examine witnesses and
call evidence in defence and reply.
(4) Any member of the Fitness to Practise Committee may admin-
ister oaths for the purposes of an inquiry.
66.—(1) For the purposes of an inquiry, the Fitness to Practise
Committee has all the powers, rights and privileges that are vestedin the Court or a judge of the Court on the occasion of an actionand that relate to—
(a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses,
(b) examining witnesses on oath or otherwise, and
(c) compelling the production (including discovery) of
records.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , a sum-
mons issued by the chairperson of the Fitness to Practise Committee
61Pt.8 S.64
Conduct of hearing.
Powers and
protections relatingto witnesses andevidence.Pt.8 S.66
62[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
or by such other member of that Committee as is authorised by it
for the purpose of the inquiry may be substituted for and is theequivalent of any formal process capable of being issued in an actionfor enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the pro-duction of records.
(3) Subject to any rules in force under section 11 and to the
necessity of observing fair procedures, the Fitness to Practise Com-mittee may receive evidence given—
(a) orally before the committee,
(b) by affidavit, or
(c) as otherwise allowed by those rules, including by means of
a live video link, a video recording, a sound recording orany other mode of transmission.
(4) A witness before the Fitness to Practise Committee is entitled
to the same immunities and privileges as a witness before the Court.
(5) A person is guilty of an offence if the person—
(a) having been duly summoned to attend before the Fitness
to Practise Committee fails without reasonable excuse toattend at the time and place indicated on the summons,
(b) while attending as a witness before the Fitness to Practise
Committee refuses to—
(i) take an oath lawfully required by the Committee to
be taken,
(ii) produce any record in the person’s power or control
that the person is lawfully required by the Commit-tee to produce, or
(iii) answer any question that the person is lawfully
required by the Committee to answer,
or
(c) while attending before the Fitness to Practise Committee
does anything that, if the Committee were a court of lawhaving power to punish for contempt, would be contemptof court.
(6) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is liable on
summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000.
(7) Where a person fails to comply with a summons to attend
before the Fitness to Practise Committee or refuses, while attendingas a witness before the Fitness to Practise Committee, to do anythingreferred to in subsection (5)(b) that the person is lawfully required
by the Committee to do, the Court, on application by the Council,may—
(a) by order require the person to attend before the Commit-
tee or to do the thing that the person refused to do, asthe case may be, and
(b) make such interim or interlocutory orders as it considers
necessary for that purpose.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(8) Neither an application for an order under subsection (7) nor
the making of such an order precludes proceedings being broughtfor an offence under subsection (5)(a) or(b)in relation to a person
on whose failure or refusal the application or order was based.
(9) Where the Fitness to Practise Committee requires the medical
records of a patient of any registered medical practitioner to be pro-duced for the purposes of an inquiry conducted by the Committee,the records shall not be made available to the Committee unless—
(a) the patient has consented in writing to the records being
made so available, or
(b) the Committee has directed in writing the practitioner, or
any other person who has power over or control of therecords, to make the records so available.
67.—(1) The Fitness to Practise Committee may, at any time after
a complaint is referred to it, request the registered medical prac-titioner the subject of the complaint to do one or more than one ofthe following:
(a) if appropriate, undertake to not repeat the conduct the
subject of the complaint;
(b) undertake to be referred to a professional competence
scheme and to undertake any requirements relating tothe improvement of the practitioner’s competence andperformance which may be imposed;
(c) consent to undergo medical treatment;
(d) consent to being censured by the Council.
(2) Where a registered medical practitioner refuses to give an
undertaking or consent the subject of a request under subsection (1)
by the Fitness to Practise Committee, the Committee may proceedas if the request had not been made.
68.—Where a complaint is withdrawn while it is being considered
by the Fitness to Practise Committee, the Committee may, with theCouncil’s agreement—
(a) decide that no further action is to be taken in relation to
the matter the subject of the complaint, or
(b) proceed as if the complaint had not been withdrawn.
69.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Fitness to Practise Commit-
tee shall, on completing an inquiry into a complaint, submit to theCouncil a report in writing on its findings.
(2) The report referred to in subsection (1) of the Fitness to Prac-
tise Committee—
(a) shall specify—
(i) the nature of the complaint that resulted in the
inquiry,
63Pt.8 S.66
If registered
medical practitionerconsents to censureor remedial action,etc.
If complaint is
withdrawn while itis being consideredby Fitness toPractise Committee.
Report to Council
by Fitness toPractise Committee.Pt.8 S.69
Steps to be taken
by Council afterreceiving report.
Duty of Council to
decide onappropriatesanction.
Provisions
supplementary tosection 71 .
64[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(ii) the evidence presented to the Committee, and
(iii) the Committee’s findings as to whether any allegation
is proved,
and
(b) may include such other matters relating to the registered
medical practitioner the subject of the complaint as theCommittee considers appropriate.
70.—The Council shall, on receiving the report referred to in
section 69(1) of the Fitness to Practise Committee in relation to a
complaint—
(a) if the Committee finds that no allegation against the regis-
tered medical practitioner the subject of the complaint isproved, dismiss the complaint,
(b) if the Committee finds that any allegation against the prac-
titioner is proved, decide under section 71 one or more
than one sanction to be imposed on the practitioner.
PART 9
Imposition of sanctions on registered medical practitioners
following reports of Fitness to Practise Committee
71.—Subject to sections 57(6)(a) and 72, the Council shall, as soon
as is practicable after receiving and considering the report referredto in section 69(1) of the Fitness to Practise Committee in relation
to a complaint concerning a registered medical practitioner wheresection 70(b) is applicable, decide that one or more than one of the
following sanctions be imposed on the practitioner:
(a) an advice or admonishment, or a censure, in writing;
(b) a censure in writing and a fine not exceeding \5,000;
(c) the attachment of conditions to the practitioner’s regis-
tration, including restrictions on the practice of medicinethat may be engaged in by the practitioner;
(d) the transfer of the practitioner’s registration to another
division of the register;
(e) the suspension of the practitioner’s registration for a speci-
fied period;
(f) the cancellation of the practitioner’s registration;
(g) a prohibition from applying for a specified period for the
restoration of the practitioner’s registration.
72.—(1) The Council shall, on deciding under section 71 to impose
a sanction referred to in section 71(b) ,(c),(d),(e)or(g)on a regis-
tered medical practitioner, specify—[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) in the case of a sanction referred to in section 71(b) , the
amount of the fine imposed on the practitioner,
(b) in the case of a sanction referred to in section 71(c) , the
nature of the conditions to be attached to the prac-titioner’s registration,
(c) in the case of a sanction referred to in section 71(d) , the
division of the register to which the practitioner’s regis-tration is to be transferred,
(d) in the case of a sanction referred to in section 71(e) , the
period of suspension of the practitioner’s registration,
(e) in the case of a sanction referred to in section 71(g) , the
period for which the practitioner is prohibited fromapplying for the restoration of the practitioner’sregistration.
(2) The Council shall not decide under section 71 to impose the
sanction referred to in section 71(f) on a registered medical prac-
titioner on the grounds of a conviction for an offence referred to insection 57(1)(g) unless—
(a) in the Council’s opinion, the nature of the offence or the
circumstances in which it was committed render the prac-titioner unfit to continue to practise medicine, or
(b) a conviction for such offence would render a person
unable to be registered under this Act.
73.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Council shall, as soon as is
practicable after deciding under section 71 to impose a sanction on a
registered medical practitioner, give notice in writing to the prac-titioner and, in any case where the Council is not the complainant,the complainant, of—
(a) the nature of the sanction that the Council has decided
to impose,
(b) the date on which the decision was made, and
(c) the reasons for the imposition of the sanction.
(2) Where the Council has decided to impose a sanction on a
registered medical practitioner other than a sanction referred to insection 71(a) , the Council shall ensure that the notice under subsec-
tion (1) is accompanied by a copy of section 75 (and, if section
57(6)(a) is applicable, a copy of section 57 ).
74.—A decision under section 71 to impose a sanction (other than
a sanction referred to in section 71(a) ) on a registered medical prac-
titioner shall not take effect unless the decision is confirmed by theCourt on an application under section 75 or76.
75.—(1) A registered medical practitioner the subject of a
decision under section 71 to impose a sanction (other than a sanction
referred to in section 71(a) ) may, not later than 21 days after the
practitioner received the notice under section 73(1) of the decision,
appeal to the Court against the decision.
65Pt.9 S.72
Duty to notify
registered medicalpractitioner ofCouncil’s sanction.
Confirmation by
Court requiredbefore certaindecisions becomeeffective.
Appeal to Court
against Council’sdecision undersection 71 .Pt.9 S.75
Application to
Court forconfirmation ofCouncil’s decision.
Evidence relating to
appeal undersection 75(1) or
application undersection 76(1) to
Court.
66[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a medical practitioner, consider any evidence adduced or argu-
ment made, whether or not adduced or made to the Fitness to Prac-tise Committee.
(3) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a medical practitioner—
(a) either—
(i) confirm the decision the subject of the application, or
(ii) cancel that decision and replace it with such other
decision as the Court considers appropriate, whichmay be a decision—
(I) to impose a different sanction on the prac-
titioner, or
(II) to impose no sanction on the practitioner,
and
(b) give the Council such directions as the Court considers
appropriate and direct how the costs of the appeal are tobe borne.
(4) The Council shall, on complying with a direction given by the
Court under subsection (3) , give notice in writing to the medical prac-
titioner concerned of the Council’s compliance with the direction.
76.—(1) Where a registered medical practitioner does not, within
the period allowed under section 75(1) , appeal to the Court against a
decision under section 71 to impose a sanction (other than a sanction
referred to in section 71(a) ) on the practitioner, the Council shall, as
soon as is practicable after the expiration of that period, make anapplication to the Court for the confirmation of the decision.
(2) An application under subsection (1) may be made on an ex
parte basis.
(3) The Court shall, on the hearing of an application under sub-
section (1) , confirm the decision under section 71 the subject of the
application unless the Court sees good reason not to do so.
77.—(1) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under
section 75(1) or an application under section 76(1) , admit and have
regard to the evidence of any person of good standing in the medicalprofession as to what constitutes professional misconduct or poorprofessional performance in relation to the practice of thatprofession.
(2) The decision of the Court on an appeal under section 75(1) or
an application under section 76(1) is final except that the Council or
the medical practitioner to whom the decision relates may, by leaveof the Court or Supreme Court, appeal against the decision to theSupreme Court on a specified question of law.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
78.—(1) The Council shall, on complying with a decision con-
firmed or given by the Court under section 75 or76to attach con-
ditions to the registration of a medical practitioner, give notice inwriting to the practitioner of the conditions as soon as is practicableafter complying with section 43(6) in respect of the conditions.
(2) The Council shall, on complying with a decision confirmed or
given by the Court under section 75 or76to transfer a registered
medical practitioner’s registration to another division of theregister—
(a) transfer the practitioner’s registration to the division con-
cerned, and
(b) give notice in writing to the practitioner of the division to
which the practitioner’s registration has been transferredas soon as is practicable after effecting such transfer.
(3) The Council shall, on complying with a decision confirmed or
given by the Court under section 75 or76to suspend for a specified
period or to cancel the registration of a medical practitioner, givenotice in writing to the practitioner of—
(a) the suspension or cancellation, as the case may be, and
(b) in the case of a suspension, the period, beginning not earl-
ier than 7 days after the date of the Court’s decision,during which the registration is to be suspended.
(4) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that where
the registration of a medical practitioner is suspended in compliancewith a decision confirmed or given by the Court under section 75 or
76to suspend that registration for a specified period—
(a) subject to paragraphs (b) and (c), this Act shall apply to
the practitioner during that period as if the practitionerwere an unregistered medical practitioner,
(b)section 40 shall not apply to the practitioner during that
period to the extent only that the practitioner uses a titlereferred to in that section which would not be a contra-vention of that section if the practitioner’s registrationwere not suspended, and
(c) if the practitioner is a visiting EEA practitioner, section 50
shall not apply to the practitioner during that period.
79.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , where a registered medical
practitioner fails to pay an appropriate fee required to be paid bythe practitioner notwithstanding that a reminder notice to pay the
fee has been sent to the practitioner at the practitioner’s registeredaddress, the Council may, not earlier than 21 days after that reminderhas been sent, remove the practitioner’s registration.
(2) The Council shall not exercise its power under subsection (1)
in the case of a registered medical practitioner the subject of a com-plaint which has not been disposed of or otherwise dealt with underPart 7 and, if applicable, Part 8 and this Part.
67Pt.9
Duty to notify
registered medicalpractitioner ofcompliance withdecisions confirmedor given by Court.
Removal of
registration forfailure to pay fee.Pt.9
Restoration, etc., of
registrationfollowing paymentof certain fees.
Restoration of
registration whichhas been cancelled.
68[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
80.—Where a medical practitioner’s registration has been removed
pursuant only to section 79 , the chief executive officer shall restore
that registration if—
(a) within 6 months after the date on which the appropriate
fee became due, the practitioner makes an applicationto the Council for the restoration of the practitioner’sregistration, and
(b) the practitioner pays to the Council the appropriate fees.
81.—(1) The Council shall not restore a medical practitioner’s
registration which has been cancelled except in accordance withthis section.
(2) The Council may at any time decide to restore the registration
of a medical practitioner whose registration has been cancelled if—
(a) the practitioner has requested the Council to make the
decision and has paid the appropriate fee required at thetime of the request for restoration,
(b) the practitioner is not prohibited under this Part from
applying for restoration of the registration,
(c) the practitioner has been given an opportunity to make an
oral or written submission to the Council,
(d) the Council has considered any submission made under
paragraph (c) and the criteria specified in rules made
under section 11 for the restoration of registration pursu-
ant to this section, and
(e) after considering all relevant facts, the Council considers
it appropriate to make the decision.
(3) The Council may on deciding to restore a medical prac-
titioner’s registration, also decide to attach to the registration anyconditions that the Council considers appropriate.
(4) The Council shall, on deciding to restore a medical prac-
titioner’s registration or to attach conditions to the registration of amedical practitioner whose registration has been so restored, givenotice in writing to the practitioner of the restoration and, if applic-able, of the attachment of the conditions as soon as is practicableafter—
(a) restoring the registration, or
(b) restoring the registration and complying with section 43(6)
in respect of the conditions,
as the case may be.
(5) The Council shall, on deciding to refuse to restore a medical
practitioner’s registration, give notice in writing (accompanied by acopy of section 83 ), as soon as is practicable after making the
decision, to the practitioner of—
(a) the decision,
(b) the date on which the decision was made, and[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(c) the reasons for the decision.
82.—(1) The Council may at any time decide to remove all or any
conditions, to which this section applies pursuant to subsection (4) ,
attached to the registration of a registered medical practitioner if—
(a) the practitioner has requested the Council to make the
decision,
(b) the practitioner has been given an opportunity to make an
oral or written submission to the Council,
(c) the Council has considered any submission made under
paragraph (b) and any other relevant information that
has come to its attention, and
(d) after considering all relevant facts, the Council considers
it appropriate to make the decision.
(2) The Council shall, on deciding to remove any or all conditions
referred to in subsection (1) attached to the registration of a regis-
tered medical practitioner, give notice in writing to the practitionerof their removal.
(3) The Council shall, on deciding to refuse to remove any con-
dition referred to in subsection (1) attached to the registration of a
medical practitioner, give notice in writing (accompanied by a copyofsection 83 ), as soon as is practicable after making the decision, to
the practitioner of—
(a) the decision,
(b) the date on which the decision was made, and
(c) the reasons for the decision.
(4) This section applies to any conditions attached to the regis-
tration of a medical practitioner pursuant to—
(a) a decision referred to in section 78(1) ,o r
(b)section 81(3) .
83.—(1) A medical practitioner the subject of a decision made by
the Council—
(a) under section 81 to refuse to restore the practitioner’s
registration or to attach conditions to the practitioner’sregistration, or
(b) under section 82 to refuse to remove a condition to which
that section applies attached to the person’s registration,
may, not later than 21 days after the practitioner received notice of
the decision under section 81(5) or82(3) , as the case may be, appeal
to the Court against the decision.
(2) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a medical practitioner, consider any evidence adduced or argu-
ment made, whether or not adduced or made to the Council.
69Pt.9 S.81
Removal of
conditions attachedto registration.
Appeal to Court
against Council’sdecision undersection 81 or82.Pt.9 S.83
Notification to
Minister, HealthService Executiveand employer ofcertain mattersrelating tosanctions.
70[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(3) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a medical practitioner—
(a) either—
(i) confirm the decision the subject of the appeal, or
(ii) cancel that decision and replace it with such other
decision as the Court considers appropriate, whichmay be a decision—
(I) to restore the registration of the practitioner in
such division of the register as the Court con-siders appropriate and—
(A) with no conditions attached to the regis-
tration, or
(B) with such conditions attached to the regis-
tration as the Court considers appropriate,
or
(II) to remove the conditions attached to the prac-
titioner’s registration or replace conditionsattached to the registration of the practitionerwith such other conditions as the Court con-siders appropriate,
and
(b) give the Council such directions as the Court considers
appropriate and direct how the costs of the appeal are tobe borne.
(4) The Council shall, on complying with any direction given by
Court under subsection (3) , give notice in writing to the medical prac-
titioner concerned of the Council’s compliance with the direction.
84.—(1) The Council shall give notice in writing to the Minister
and the Health Service Executive as soon as is practicable after anyof the following measures take effect under this Part:
(a) the cancellation of a medical practitioner’s registration;
(b) the restoration of a medical practitioner’s registration;
(c) the removal of a medical practitioner’s registration;
(d) the suspension of a medical practitioner’s registration;
(e) the termination of the period during which a medical prac-
titioner’s registration is suspended;
(f) the transfer of a medical practitioner’s registration to
another division of the register;
(g) the attachment of conditions to a medical practitioner’s
registration;
(h) the removal of conditions attached under this Part to the
registration of a medical practitioner’s registration;[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(i) the prohibiting of a medical practitioner from applying for
a specified period for the restoration of the prac-titioner’s registration;
(j) the censuring and fining of a registered medical prac-
titioner;
(k) the censuring of a registered medical practitioner.
(2) Where it comes to the Council’s attention that, under the law
of a state other than the State, a measure corresponding to onereferred to in any of paragraphs (a) to(k)ofsubsection (1) has been
taken in relation to a registered medical practitioner, the Councilshall, as soon as is practicable, give notice in writing to the Ministerand the Health Service Executive of the measure.
(3) The Council shall give notice in writing to an employer (other
than the Health Service Executive) where—
(a) it comes to the Council’s attention that any measure
referred to in subsection (1) or(2)has been taken in
relation to a registered medical practitioner employed bythe employer, and
(b) the employer’s name is known to the Council.
(4) Where—
(a) it comes to the Council’s attention that any measure
referred to in subsection (1) or(2)has been taken in
relation to a registered medical practitioner, and
(b) the Council has reason to believe that—
(i) the practitioner is registered in another jurisdiction,
and
(ii) those measures may not have come to the attention
of the body duly authorised to perform functions inthat jurisdiction that correspond to the functions ofthe Council,
the Council shall give notice in writing to that body of
those measures.
85.—The Council shall, if satisfied that it is in the public interest
to do so—
(a) advise the public when—
(i) any measure referred to in section 84(1) takes effect
under this Part in respect of a medical practitioner,
(ii) any measure referred to in section 84(2) in respect
of a medical practitioner comes to the knowledge ofthe Council,
(b) after consultation with the Fitness to Practise Committee,
publish a transcript of all or any part of the proceedingsof the Committee at an inquiry, whether with or withoutany information which would enable all, or any one or
71Pt.9 S.84
Information Council
may publish inpublic interest.Pt.9 S.85
Duties of Health
Service Executive inrelation to medicaland dentaleducation andtraining.
72[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
more than one, of the parties to the proceedings to be
identified.
PART 10
Education and Training
86.—(1) In this section—
“dental training bodies” means the bodies approved by the Dental
Council under section 37(3) of the Dentists Act 1985;
“medical training bodies” means the bodies approved by the Council
under section 89(3)(a)(ii) .
(2) The Health Service Executive, in accordance with section
7(4)( b) of the Health Act 2004, shall, with respect to basic medical
education and training, facilitate the education and training ofstudents training to be registered medical practitioners.
(3) The Health Service Executive shall, with respect to specialist
medical and dental education and training, have the followingresponsibilities:
(a) to promote the development of specialist medical and den-
tal education and training and to co-ordinate such devel-opments in co-operation with the Council, the DentalCouncil, the medical training bodies and the dental train-ing bodies;
(b) in co-operation with the medical training bodies and the
dental training bodies and after consultation with theHigher Education Authority, to undertake appropriatemedical and dental practitioner workforce planning forthe purpose of meeting specialist medical and dentalstaffing and training needs of the health service on anongoing basis;
(c) to assess on an annual basis the number of intern training
posts and the number and type of specialist medical train-ing posts required by the health service and, pursuant tothat assessment, to put proposals to the Council inrelation to the Council’s functions under section 88(3)(a)
and (4)(a);
(d) to assess on an annual basis the need for and appropriate-
ness of medical posts which—
(i) do not fall within paragraph (c) , and
(ii) are not posts for consultants,
and to publish the results of that assessment; and
(e) to advise the Minister, after consultation with the medical
training bodies and the dental training bodies and withsuch other bodies as it may consider appropriate, onmedical and dental education and on all other matters,including financial matters, relating to the developmentand co-ordination of specialist medical and dental edu-cation and training.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(4) The Minister may, by notice in writing given to the Health
Service Executive, require the Executive to provide such informationin relation to the performance of the Executive’s functions under thisAct as is specified in the notice and within the period specified inthe notice (being a period reasonable in the circumstances).
(5) The Health Service Executive shall comply with a notice given
to it under subsection (4) except to the extent that it is prohibited
from doing so by another provision of this Act.
(6) Specialist medical and dental education and training shall, for
the purposes of sections 38 and 39 of the Health Act 2004, be deemedto be a health and personal social service within the meaning ofsection 2 of that Act.
(7) The Health Service Executive shall carry out such functions,
other than functions assigned to it by this Act, as may be assigned toit from time to time by the Minister following consultation with it inrelation to medical and dental education and training.
87.—(1) The Council is designated, in accordance with Article 56
of Directive 2005/36/EC, as the competent authority to award orreceive evidence of formal qualifications in medicine and specialisedmedicine and other documents or information, to receive appli-cations and take the decisions referred to in the Directive as theyrelate to medical practitioners.
(2) The Council shall ensure that basic medical qualifications
granted in the State by bodies approved under section 88(2)(a)(i)(II)
satisfy the requirements of Article 24 of Directive 2005/36/EC inrelation to basic medical training.
(3) The Council shall ensure that the requirements relating to
education and training in specialised medicine in the State satisfy theminimum standards specified in Directive 2005/36/EC relating tosuch education and training and within the period, if any, specifiedin the Directive.
(4) The Council shall ensure the confidentiality of information
received by it under Article 50.1 of Directive 2005/36/EC.
(5) The Council shall give notice to the Minister forthwith of any
administrative measure implemented by it for the purposes of thissection.
88.—(1) The Council shall—
(a) set and publish in the prescribed manner the standards of
medical education and training for basic and specialistmedical qualifications, and
(b) monitor adherence to the standards referred to in para-
graph (a) .
(2) The Council shall, in relation to basic medical education—
(a) subject to section 87(2) , after it has consulted with the
Minister for Education and Science, and in accordancewith the relevant criteria specified in rules made undersection 11 —
73Pt.10 S.86
Functions of
Council in relationto Directives ofEuropean Unionrelating to medicaleducation andtraining.
Duties of Council in
relation to medicaleducation andtraining.Pt.10 S.88
74[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(i) approve, approve subject to conditions attached to the
approval of, amend or remove conditions attachedto the approval of, or withdraw the approval of—
(I) programmes of basic medical education and
training, and
(II) the bodies which may deliver those programmes,
(ii) refuse to approve a body as a body which may deliver
those programmes,
(b) prepare and publish in the prescribed manner guidelines
on curriculum issues and content to be included in prog-rammes approved under paragraph (a) ,
(c) prepare and publish in the prescribed manner standards
required for the award of a basic medical qualificationpursuant to programmes approved under paragraph (a) ,
(d) monitor adherence to the criteria referred to in paragraph
(a), the guidelines referred to in paragraph (b) and the
standards referred to in paragraph (c) ,
(e) inspect bodies approved under paragraph (a) in order to
ensure ongoing compliance with the criteria referred toin that paragraph, the guidelines referred to in paragraph
(b)and the standards referred to in paragraph (c) ,
(f) inspect places in the State where training is provided to
persons undertaking training for a basic medical qualifi-cation, for the purposes of medical education and train-ing standards,
(g) following inspections under paragraph (f) , issue recom-
mendations to the management of any place referred toin that paragraph on any improvements in medical edu-cation and training standards which may be required orany other issues arising from such inspections,
(h) publish in the prescribed manner details of all inspections
carried out under this subsection,
(i) prepare and publish in the prescribed manner guidelines
for bodies approved under paragraph (a) on ethical stan-
dards and behaviour appropriate for medical studentspursuing a course of study leading to a basic medicalqualification pursuant to programmes approved underparagraph (a) , and
(j) advise the Minister and the Minister for Education and
Science on any issues relating to its functions under thissubsection.
(3) The Council shall, in relation to medical education and train-
ing for interns—
(a) on foot of proposals received from the Health Service
Executive under section 86(3)(c) , and in accordance with
relevant criteria specified in rules made under section 11 ,
specify the number of intern training posts it approvesfor the purposes of intern training,[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(b) prepare and publish in the prescribed manner guidelines
on medical education and training for interns,
(c) advise the Health Service Executive in regard to the mini-
mum entry criteria for posts approved under paragraph
(a)in consultation with bodies approved under section
89(3)(a)(ii) ,
(d) specify and publish in the prescribed manner the standards
for training and experience required for the granting of acertificate of experience,
(e) inspect places with posts approved under paragraph (a)
for the purposes of monitoring adherence to guidelinesreferred to in paragraph (b) and the standards referred
to in paragraph (d) ,
(f) following inspections under paragraph (e) , issue recom-
mendations to the management of any place referred toin that paragraph on any improvements which may berequired or any other issues arising from suchinspections,
(g) following prior consultation with the Minister, the Health
Service Executive and the management of any placereferred to in paragraph (e) , and having regard to the
views expressed in that consultation, remove approvalfrom such place for the purposes of internship trainingwhere the Council considers that the guidelines referredto in paragraph (b) or the standards referred to in para-
graph (d) are no longer being adhered to in respect of
that place,
(h) publish in the prescribed manner details of all inspections
carried out under this subsection, and
(i) advise the Minister on any issues relating to its functions
under this subsection.
(4) The Council shall, in relation to specialist medical education
and training—
(a) on foot of proposals received from the Health Service
Executive under section 86(3)(c) , and in accordance with
the relevant criteria specified in rules made under section
11, specify the number and type of posts it approves for
the purposes of specialist medical education and training,
(b) prepare and publish in the prescribed manner guidelines
on specialist medical education and training,
(c) advise the Health Service Executive in regard to the mini-
mum entry criteria for posts approved under paragraph
(a)in consultation with bodies approved under section
89(3)(a)(ii) ,
(d) specify and publish in the prescribed manner the standards
for training and experience required for the granting of aspecialist medical qualification,
(e) inspect places with posts approved under paragraph (a)
for the purposes of monitoring adherence to guidelines
75Pt.10 S.88Pt.10 S.88
76[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
referred to in paragraph (b) and the standards referred
to in paragraph (d) ,
(f) following inspections under paragraph (e) , issue recom-
mendations to the management of any place referred toin that paragraph on any improvements which may berequired or any other issues arising from suchinspections,
(g) following prior consultation with the Minister, the Health
Service Executive and the management of any placereferred to in paragraph (e) , and having regard to the
views expressed in that consultation, remove approvalfrom such place for the purposes of specialist trainingwhere the Council considers that the guidelines referredto in paragraph (b) or the standards referred to in para-
graph (d) are no longer being adhered to in respect of
that place,
(h) publish in the prescribed manner details of all inspections
carried out under this subsection, and
(i) advise the Minister on issues relating to its functions under
this subsection.
(5) Where the Council makes a decision under subsection
(2)(a)(i)(II) or(ii), it shall give notice in writing (accompanied by a
copy of section 90 ), as soon as is practicable after making the
decision, to the body the subject of the decision of—
(a) the decision,
(b) the date on which the decision was made, and
(c) the reasons for the decision.
(6) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by section 3 —
(a) a programme of basic medical education and training lead-
ing to the qualification of—
(i) Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery of the
National University of Ireland,
(ii) Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery of the
University of Dublin, or
(iii) Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of
Ireland and Licentiate of the Royal College of Sur-geons in Ireland,
shall be deemed to be a programme of basic medical edu-
cation and training approved under subsection
(2)(a)(i)(I) as if, on the commencement of section 3 , the
Council had approved such programme under that sub-section, and the other provisions of this Act (includingsubsection (7) ) shall be construed accordingly,
(b) a body which, immediately before the commencement of
section 3 , delivered a programme of basic medical edu-
cation and training leading to a qualification referred toinparagraph (a) shall be deemed to be a body approved[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
under subsection (2)(a)(i)(II) in respect of such prog-
ramme as if, on that commencement, the Council had soapproved the body, and the other provisions of this Act(including section 17(1)(a) ) shall be construed
accordingly.
(7) The Council may recognise a degree, diploma or other qualifi-
cation awarded in a third country to be at least the equivalent ofa qualification awarded following the satisfactory completion of aprogramme of basic medical education and training approved undersubsection (2)(a)(i)(I) .
(8) The Council shall prepare and publish in the prescribed man-
ner guidelines on ethical considerations to be taken into account inrespect of the acceptance or otherwise of any non-Exchequer fundingoffered or provided in relation to medical education and training forbasic and specialist medical qualifications.
(9) The Council shall, in consultation with the Dental Council, the
Health Service Executive and such other appropriate bodies as theCouncil thinks fit, arrange for the provision of career information toregistered medical practitioners and registered dentists.
89.—(1) Subject to subsection (5) , the Council may, with the con-
sent of the Minister, determine the medical specialties which it recog-nises for the purpose of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Council shall specify, in relation to each medical specialty
recognised under subsection (1) , the titles and designations of qualifi-
cations in specialised medicine granted in the State which may berequired to enable a medical practitioner to secure registration in theSpecialist Division in respect of that specialty.
(3) Subject to section 87(3) , the Council shall, in relation to each
medical specialty recognised under subsection (1) , with the consent
of the Minister and in accordance with the relevant criteria specifiedin rules made under section 11 —
(a) approve, approve subject to conditions attached to the
approval of, amend or remove conditions attached to theapproval of, or withdraw the approval of—
(i) programmes of specialist training in relation to that
medical specialty, and
(ii) the bodies which may grant evidence of the satisfac-
tory completion of specialist training in relation tothat medical specialty,
(b) refuse to approve a body as a body which may grant evi-
dence of the satisfactory completion of specialist trainingin relation to that medical specialty.
(4) Where the Council withdraws an approval under subsection
(3)from a body referred to in that subsection, it shall, where appro-
priate, make every effort to approve under that subsection an alter-nate body.
(5) The medical specialties recognised under subsection (1) shall
include such medical specialties as may be designated as applying tothe State in any Directive adopted by the Council of the EuropeanCommunities relating to specialised medicine.
77Pt.10 S.88
Training bodies and
qualifications forthe purposes of theSpecialist andTrainee SpecialistDivisions.Pt.10 S.89
Appeal to Court
against Council’sdecision undersection88(2)(a)(i)(II) or
(ii)or89(3)(a)(ii)
or(b).
78[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(6) Where the Council makes a decision under subsection (3)(a)
or(b), it shall give notice in writing (accompanied by a copy of
section 90 ), as soon as is practicable after making the decision, to the
body the subject of the decision of—
(a) the decision,
(b) the date on which the decision was made, and
(c) the reasons for the decision.
(7) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1978 by section 3 —
(a) a specialty which was, immediately before the commence-
ment of section 3 , recognised under section 38(1) of that
Act shall be deemed to be a medical specialty recognisedunder subsection (1) —
(i) as if, on that commencement, the Council had recog-
nised it as a medical specialty under that subsec-tion, and
(ii) on the same conditions as the specialty was recognised
under section 38(1) of that Act immediately beforethat commencement,
and the other provisions of this Act shall be construed
accordingly, and
(b) a body which was, immediately before the commencement
ofsection 3 , recognised under section 38(3) of that Act
for the purpose of granting evidence of satisfactory com-pletion of specialist training in relation to a specialtyrecognised under section 38(1) of that Act and which fallswithin paragraph (a) shall be deemed to be a body
approved under subsection (3)(a)(ii) for the purposes of
granting evidence of the satisfactory completion ofspecialist training in relation to that medical specialty—
(i) as if, on that commencement, the Council had
approved it as such a body under that subsection,and
(ii) on the same conditions as the body was approved
under section 38(3) of that Act immediately beforethat commencement,
and the other provisions of this Act shall be construed
accordingly.
90.—(1) A body the subject of a decision made by the Council
under section 88(2)(a)(i)(II) or(ii)or89(3)(a)(ii) or(b)may, not
later than 21 days after the body received notice of the decisionunder section 88(5) or89(6) , as the case may be, appeal to the Court
against the decision.
(2) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a body, consider any evidence adduced or argument made,
whether adduced or made to the Council.
(3) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a body—[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) either—
(i) confirm the decision the subject of the appeal, or
(ii) cancel that decision and replace it with such other
decision as the Court considers appropriate,
and
(b) give the Council such direction as the Court considers
appropriate and direct how the costs of the appeal are tobe borne.
(4) The Council shall, on complying with any direction given by
the Court under subsection (3) , give notice in writing to the body
concerned of the Council’s compliance with the direction.
PART 11
Maintenance of Professional Competence
91.—(1) It shall be the duty of the Council to satisfy itself as to the
ongoing maintenance of the professional competence of registeredmedical practitioners.
(2) The Council shall, not later than the 1st anniversary of the
commencement of this section, or such longer period as the Ministerpermits in writing at the request of the Council, develop, establishand operate one or more than one scheme for the purposes of per-forming its duty under subsection (1) .
(3) The Council shall, in respect of a professional competence
scheme—
(a) review the operation of the scheme periodically, and
(b) may, following such a review, make recommendations to
the Minister as to the steps that, in the opinion of theCouncil, may need to be taken to improve the operationof the scheme.
(4) The Council may, with the consent of the Minister and in
accordance with the relevant criteria specified in rules made undersection 11 —
(a) recognise, recognise subject to conditions attached to the
recognition of, amend or remove conditions attached tothe recognition of, or withdraw the recognition of, a bodyapproved under section 88(2)(a)(i)(II) or89(3)(a)(ii) with
which the Council may make and carry out an arrange-ment with for the purposes of assisting the Council toperform its duty under subsection (1) ,o r
(b) refuse to recognise a body approved under section
88(2)(a)(i)(II) or89(3)(a)(ii) as a body with which the
Council may make and carry out an arrangement with forthose purposes.
(5) The Council shall monitor and assess the performance of
bodies recognised under subsection (4) based on the criteria referred
to in that subsection.
79Pt.10 S.90
Duty of Council in
relation tomaintenance ofprofessionalcompetence ofregistered medicalpractitioners.Pt.11 S.91
Appeal to Court
against Council’sdecision undersection 91(4)(a) or
(b).
80[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(6) Where, arising from the performance of its duty under subsec-
tion (1) , the Council considers that a registered medical
practitioner—
(a) who, being required under section 94(2) to co-operate with
any requirements imposed on the practitioner in rulesmade under section 11 , has refused to so co-operate, has
failed to so co-operate or has ceased to so co-operate,
(b) has contravened section 94(4) ,
(c) may pose an immediate risk of harm to the public, or
(d) may have committed a serious breach of its guidance on
ethical standards and behaviour,
then the Council shall forthwith make a complaint.
(7) Where, arising from the performance of its duty under subsec-
tion (1) , the Council considers that a medical practitioner registered
in the Specialist Division or the Trainee Specialist Division has beengiven every reasonable opportunity by the Council to improve thepractitioner’s professional performance but whose professional com-petence is found by the Council to continue to be below the stan-dards of competence that can reasonably be expected for continuedregistration in the Specialist Division, or the Trainee Specialist Div-ision, as the case may be then the Council may make a complaint.
(8) Where the Council makes a decision under subsection (4)(a)
or(b), it shall give notice in writing (accompanied by a copy of
section 92 ), as soon as is practicable after making the decision, to the
body the subject of the decision of—
(a) the decision,
(b) the date on which the decision was made, and
(c) the reasons for the decision.
92.—(1) A body the subject of a decision made by the Council
under section 91(4)(a) or(b)may, not later than 21 days after the
body received notice of the decision under section 91(8) , appeal to
the Court against the decision.
(2) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a body, consider any evidence adduced or argument made,
whether adduced or made to the Council.
(3) The Court may, on the hearing of an appeal under subsection
(1)by a body—
(a) either—
(i) confirm the decision the subject of the appeal, or
(ii) cancel that decision and replace it with such other
decision as the Court considers appropriate,
and[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(b) give the Council such direction as the Court considers
appropriate and direct how the costs of the appeal are tobe borne.
(4) The Council shall, on complying with any direction given by
the Court under subsection (3) , give notice in writing to the body
concerned of the Council’s compliance with the direction.
93.—(1) The Health Service Executive shall facilitate the main-
tenance of professional competence of registered medical prac-titioners pursuant to a professional competence scheme applicableto the practitioners concerned.
(2) An employer of a registered medical practitioner, not being
the Health Service Executive, shall facilitate the maintenance of pro-fessional competence of registered medical practitioners pursuant toa professional competence scheme applicable to the practitionersconcerned.
94.—(1) A registered medical practitioner shall maintain the prac-
titioner’s professional competence on an ongoing basis pursuant to aprofessional competence scheme applicable to that practitioner.
(2) A registered medical practitioner shall co-operate with any
requirements imposed on the practitioner in rules made undersection 11 .
(3) The Council may, by notice in writing given to a registered
medical practitioner whose registration does not fall within subsec-
tion (2) but who has given an undertaking pursuant to section 67(1) ,
require the practitioner to co-operate with such an undertaking tothe satisfaction of the Council.
(4) A medical practitioner shall comply with a notice under sub-
section (3) given to the practitioner.
95.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (4), a person who acquires
any information by virtue of the person’s performance or assistancein the performance of functions under this Act relating to any pro-fessional competence scheme shall preserve confidentiality withregard to the information and, without prejudice to the foregoing,shall not—
(a) disclose the information to another person except where
the disclosure is necessary for such performance or assist-ance, or
(b) cause or permit any other person to have access to the
information except where the access is necessary for thatother person to perform or assist in the performance offunctions under this Act (including the functions of anysection 20(2) committee).
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) , the Council may disclose
information—
(a) in the form of a summary compiled from information pro-
vided in relation to registered medical practitioners part-icipating in a competence scheme if the summary is so
81Pt.11 S.92
Duty of Health
Service Executiveand otheremployers inrelation to themaintenance ofprofessionalcompetence ofregistered medicalpractitioners.
Duty of registered
medicalpractitioners tomaintainprofessionalcompetence.
Confidentiality.Pt.11 S.95
Interpretation of
Part 12 .
Transfer day and
dissolution ofBoard.
Minister may
require informationfrom Board.
Transfer of staff.
82[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
compiled as to prevent particulars relating to the identity
of any such practitioners being ascertained from it,
(b) with a view to the institution of, or otherwise for the pur-
poses of, any criminal proceedings or any investigation inthe State, or
(c) in connection with any civil proceedings to which the
Council is a party.
(3) The Freedom of Information Acts 1997 and 2003 shall not
apply to a record (within the meaning of those Acts) relating to anyprofessional competence scheme.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a dis-
closure of information pursuant to a court order.
(5) A person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding\5,000 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 6 months or both.
PART 12
Dissolution of Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board
96.—In this Part—
“Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board” means the board estab-
lished under section 39 of the Act of 1978;
“transfer day” means the day appointed by the Minister under
section 97(1) as the transfer day.
97.—(1) The Minister shall, by order, appoint a day as the transfer
day for the purposes of this Part.
(2) The Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board is, by this Act,
dissolved on the transfer day.
(3) References to the Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board in
any Act of the Oireachtas passed before the transfer day or in anyinstrument made before the transfer day under an Act of theOireachtas are to be read on and after that day as references to theHealth Service Executive.
98.—(1) The Minister, may, by notice in writing given to the Post-
graduate Medical and Dental Board, require the Board to provideto the Minister, either on or before the transfer day, such informationin relation to the performance of the Board’s functions as is specifiedin the notice.
(2) The Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board shall comply
with a notice given to it under subsection (1) except to the extent
that it is prohibited from doing so by another provision of the Actof 1978.
99.—(1) Every person who, immediately before the transfer day,
was an officer or servant of the Postgraduate Medical and Dental[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
Board is transferred to, and becomes a member of, the Health
Service Executive’s staff on the transfer day.
(2) Except in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated
with a recognised trade union or staff association, a person trans-ferred under this section is entitled, while in the Health ServiceExecutive’s service, to be employed on conditions of employment noless favourable than those to which that person was entitled immedi-ately before the transfer day.
(3) The previous service of a person transferred under this section
with the Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board is to be counted asservice for the purposes of, but subject to any exceptions orexclusions in—
(a) the Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003,
(b) the Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001,
(c) the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997,
(d) the Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005,
(e) the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005,
(f) the Carer’s Leave Act 2001,
(g) the Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006.
(4) Any superannuation benefits awarded by the Executive to or
in respect of a person transferred under this section, and the con-ditions relating to those benefits, are to be no less favourable thanthose applicable to or in respect of that person immediately beforethe transfer day.
(5) In this section—
“conditions of employment” includes conditions in respect of
remuneration and related matters;
“recognised trade union or staff association” means a trade union or
staff association recognised by the Health Service Executive for thepurposes of negotiations that are concerned with the conditions ofemployment or working conditions of employees.
100.—(1) With effect from the transfer day, the following are
transferred to the Health Service Executive:
(a) all property (real and personal) and rights held or enjoyed
immediately before that day by the Postgraduate Medicaland Dental Board;
(b) all liabilities incurred before that day by that Board that
had not been discharged before that day.
(2) Without any further conveyance, transfer or assignment—
(a) property which falls within subsection (1) vests, on the
transfer day, in the Health Service Executive for all theestate, term or interest for which, immediately beforethat day, it was vested in the Postgraduate Medical and
83Pt.12 S.99
Transfer of
property andliabilities to HealthService Executive.Pt.12 S.100
Preservation of
certain contractsand adaptation ofreferences.
Pending legal
proceedings.
Preparation of
accounts.
84[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
Dental Board, but subject to all trusts and equities affect-
ing the property and capable of being performed,
(b) rights which fall within subsection (1) are, on and after the
transfer day, rights of the Health Service Executive, and
(c) liabilities which fall within subsection (1) are, on and after
the transfer day, liabilities of the Health ServiceExecutive.
(3) All monies, stocks, shares and securities transferred to the
Health Service Executive by this section that, immediately beforethe transfer day, are in the name of the Postgraduate Medical andDental Board, shall, at the request of the Executive, be transferredinto its name.
(4) Every right and liability transferred to the Health Service
Executive by this section may, on and after the transfer day, be suedon, recovered or enforced by or against the Executive in its ownname and it shall not be necessary for it to give notice of the transferto the person whose right or liability is transferred by this section.
101.—Every contract or agreement made between the Postgradu-
ate Medical and Dental Board (or any trustee or agent acting on itsbehalf) and any other person, and in force immediately before thetransfer day—
(a) continues in force on and after that day,
(b) is to be read and have effect as if the name of the Health
Service Executive were substituted in the contract oragreement, as the case may be, for that of the Postgradu-
ate Medical and Dental Board or, as the case may be,any trustee or agent acting on its behalf, and
(c) is enforceable against the Health Service Executive.
102.—If, immediately before the transfer day, any legal pro-
ceedings to which the Postgraduate Medical and Dental Board isa party are pending, the Health Service Executive’s name shall besubstituted in the proceedings for the name of that Board, and theproceedings shall not abate because of the substitution.
103.—(1) The Health Service Executive shall, as soon as is practi-
cable after the transfer day, prepare, in such form as may beapproved by the Minister, all proper and usual accounts of moneyreceived or expended by the Postgraduate Medical and Dental Boardin the accounting year, or the part of an accounting year, of thatBoard ending immediately before the transfer day.
(2) The Health Service Executive shall submit accounts prepared
under subsection (1) to the Comptroller and Auditor General for
audit.
(3) The Health Service Executive shall, after the audit by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of the accounts prepared undersubsection (1) , present to the Minister the audited accounts together
with the Comptroller and Auditor General’s report.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(4) The Minister shall ensure that, as soon as possible after the
audited accounts and the report referred to in subsection (3) are
presented to the Minister, copies of them are laid before each Houseof the Oireachtas.
PART 13
Miscellaneous
104.—(1) In any action for defamation, the following proceedings,
reports and communications are absolutely privileged—
(a) proceedings of a Preliminary Proceedings Committee or
of the Fitness to Practise Committee under any of Parts
7,8and 9,
(b) communications by the Fitness to Practise Committee
under section 67 ,
(c) reports of the Fitness to Practise Committee under
section 69 ,
(d) communications by the Council under section 70 , and
(e) any other communication made by—
(i) a committee pursuant to any of Parts 7 ,8and 9in
performing a function of the committee, or
(ii) the Council pursuant to any of Parts 7 ,8and 9in
performing a function of the Council.
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , a document which relates to a medi-
cal practitioner’s participation in a professional competence scheme,to the extent that it does so relate, shall not be admitted in evidence(whether by discovery or otherwise) in any civil proceedings exceptwith the consent of the medical practitioner (in this section referredto as the “relevant consent”).
(3) No witness in any civil proceedings shall be obliged or permit-
ted to disclose, in the absence of the relevant consent—
(a) subject to subsection (4) , the contents of a document which
relates to a medical practitioner’s participation in a pro-fessional competence scheme to the extent that it does sorelate, or
(b) subject to subsection (5) , any deliberation, in relation to a
medical practitioner’s participation in a professional com-petence scheme, of a person.
(4) Neither subsection (1) norsubsection (3)(a) shall apply in the
case of a document the subject of an allegation that it has not beenmade in good faith.
(5) Subsection (3)(b) shall not apply in the case of a deliberation
the subject of an allegation that it has not been made in good faith.
85Pt.12 S.103
Privilege.Pt.13
Investigation.
Council to be
licensing authority,etc., underAnatomy Act 1832.
Power to specify
forms.
86[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
105.—(1) The Council shall, at the request of the Minister, or
may, of its own initiative or upon a complaint made by a member ofthe public, investigate any case of an individual—
(a) who, not being a registered medical practitioner, is sus-
pected of practising or having practised medicine in con-travention of a provision of this Act, or
(b) who, not being a registered medical practitioner, is sus-
pected of claiming or having claimed to be a registeredmedical practitioner in contravention of a provision ofthis Act.
(2) Where the Council has carried out an investigation under sub-
section (1) , the Council shall, if it has reasonable grounds to believe
that the individual the subject of the investigation—
(a) is not a registered medical practitioner, and
(b) either—
(i) is practising or has practised medicine in contra-
vention of a provision of this Act, or
(ii) is claiming or has claimed to be a registered medical
practitioner,
then the Council shall report the matter forthwith to the Garda
Sı´ocha´na and the Minister and may seek an injunction in the High
Court requiring the person to cease the activities the Council reason-ably believes to be in contravention of this Act.
106.—The Council—
(a) is, by virtue of this section, authorised to—
(i) grant a licence to practise anatomy in the State,
(ii) appoint inspectors of places in the State where anat-
omy is carried on, and
(iii) be the person to whom such inspectors shall make
returns,
under and in accordance with the Anatomy Act 1832, and
(b) shall, at the request of the Minister and as soon as is practi-
cable after it receives the request, provide the Ministerwith such information concerning its functions under theAnatomy Act 1832 as the Minister specifies in therequest.
107.—(1) The relevant body may specify the form of documents
required for the purposes of this Act as the relevant body thinks fit.
(2) The relevant body’s power under subsection (1) may be exer-
cised in such a way as to—
(a) include in the specified form of any document referred to
in that subsection a statutory declaration—[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(i) to be made by the person completing the form, and
(ii) as to whether the particulars contained in the form
are true and correct to the best of that person’sknowledge and belief,
and
(b) specify two or more forms of any document referred to in
that subsection, whether as alternatives, or to provide forparticular circumstances or particular cases, as the rel-evant body thinks fit.
(3) A form specified under this section shall be—
(a) completed in accordance with such directions and instruc-
tions as are specified in the form,
(b) accompanied by such documents as are specified in the
form, and
(c) if the completed form is required to be provided to—
(i) the relevant body,
(ii) another person on behalf of the relevant body, or
(iii) any other person,
so provided in the manner, if any, specified in the form.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Council may—
(a) specify a form to be completed by a registered medical
practitioner in connection with the payment by the prac-titioner of any fee determined under section 36(1)(b) ,
(b) in that form, require the practitioner to supply the Council
with such information that the practitioner would have tosupply the Council if the practitioner were not registeredbut were seeking registration (including informationabout any relevant medical disability).
(5) In this section, “relevant body” means—
(a) subject to paragraph (b) , the Council,
(b) in relation to a function under this Act performed by a
section 20(2) committee, that committee.
108.—(1) Every reference to a registered medical practitioner
contained in any enactment or any statutory instrument shall be con-strued as a reference to a registered medical practitioner within themeaning of section 2 .
(2) Every reference to the General Register of Medical Prac-
titioners contained in any other enactment or any statutory instru-ment shall be construed as a reference to any division of the register.
(3) Every reference to—
87Pt.13 S.107
Construction of
references toregistered medicalpractitioner andMedical Council,etc.Pt.13 S.108
Persons entitled to
sign medicalcertificates.
Section 3.
88[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(a) the Medical Council, or
(b) the Medical Registration Council,
contained in any other enactment or any statutory instrument shall
be construed as the Council within the meaning of section 2 .
109.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , every certificate which is
required for any purpose by or under any enactment or any statutoryinstrument to be signed by any physician, surgeon, licentiate in medi-cine and surgery or other medical practitioner shall, on and afterthe commencement of section 3 , be signed by a registered medical
practitioner and no such certificate signed on or after that com-mencement by a person who is not a registered medical practitionershall be of any validity or effect.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not operate to prevent a person who is
not a registered medical practitioner from signing a certificate if anyenactment or any statutory instrument requires or permits the personto sign the certificate in a capacity other than the capacity of phys-ician, surgeon, licentiate in medicine and surgery or other medicalpractitioner and that person is of that other capacity.
(3) In this section, “certificate” includes a prescription.
SCHEDULE 1
Repeals and Revocations
PART 1
Acts Repealed
1. Medical Practitioners Act 1978 (No. 4 of 1978).
2. Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 1993 (No. 17 of 1993).3. Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 2000 (No. 24 of 2000).
4. Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 2002 (No. 17 of 2002).
PART 2
Statutory Instruments Revoked
1. Medical Practitioners Act 1927 (Application of Section 26) Order
1944 (S.I. No. 82 of 1944).
2. Medical Practitioners Act 1927 (Application of Section 26) Order
1953 (S.I. No. 272 of 1953).
3. Medical Practitioners Act 1927 (Application of Section 26) Order
1958 (S.I. No. 212 of 1958).
4. Medical Practitioners Act 1927 (Application of Section 26) Order
1960 (S.I. No. 206 of 1960).[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
5. Medical Practitioners Act 1927 (Application of Section 26) Order
1961 (S.I. No. 31 of 1961).
6. Medical Practitioners Act 1927 (Application of Section 26) Order
1961 (S.I. No. 99 of 1961).
7. Medical Council (Election of Members) Regulations 1978 (S.I. No.
197 of 1978).
8. European Communities (Recognition of Medical Qualifications)
Regulations 1976 (S.I. No. 288 of 1976).
9. Medical Practitioners (Termination of Agreement) Order 1979
(S.I. No. 158 of 1979).
10. Rules made pursuant to section 25A of the Medical Practitioners
Act 1978 as inserted by the Medical Practitioners (Amendment)Act 2002 (S.I. No. 285 of 2003).
11. Rules made pursuant to section 25A of the Medical Practitioners
Act 1978 as inserted by the Medical Practitioners (Amendment)Act 2002 (S.I. No. 286 of 2003).
12. Rules made pursuant to section 25A of the Medical Practitioners
Act 1978 as inserted by the Medical Practitioners (Amendment)Act 2002 (S.I. No. 287 of 2003).
SCHEDULE 2
Council: Membership and Meetings
Tenure of Office
1. Subject to the provisions of this Schedule in relation to the
filling of casual vacancies, every member of the Council shall holdoffice, unless the member sooner dies, resigns or becomes disquali-fied, for a period, not exceeding 5 years, specified in writing by theMinister.
2. No person shall hold office as a member of the Council for
more than 2 consecutive terms of 5 years (for which purpose mem-bership of the Council which occurred before the commencement ofthis paragraph shall be taken into account).
Resignations and Termination of Membership
3. Subject to paragraph 4 , where the Minister receives a request
in writing from the Council to terminate the appointment of amember of the Council on the ground that the member has failed tocomply with paragraph 12 , the Minister may terminate the appoint-
ment of the member.
4. The Minister shall not terminate the appointment of a member
of the Council pursuant to a request referred to in paragraph 3
unless—
(a) the request is accompanied by evidence which satisfies the
Minister that—
(i) the member has been given a reasonable opportunity
to make representations in writing to the Council to
89Sch. 1
Section 4(4).Sch. 2
90[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
explain the reasons why the member has failed to
comply with paragraph 12 , and
(ii) the member has failed or refused to make those rep-
resentations,
or
(b) the request is accompanied by—
(i) evidence which satisfies the Minister that the member
has been given a reasonable opportunity to makerepresentations in writing to the Council to explain
the reasons why the member has failed to complywith paragraph 12 ,
(ii) copies of the representations in writing made by the
member to the Council, and
(iii) a statement by the Council that it has given due
regard to those representations in writing but hasreached the conclusion that they do not afford areasonable excuse for the member’s failure to com-ply with paragraph 12 ,
and
(c) where subparagraph (b) is applicable, the Minister is satis-
fied that the conclusion referred to in clause (iii) of that
subparagraph is reasonable in the circumstances of thecase.
5. A member of the Council may resign membership by giving
notice in writing signed by the member to the Council, but the resig-nation shall not become effective until the meeting of the Councilnext held after receipt of the notice of resignation.
6. The membership of the Council of a medical practitioner
appointed under any of section 17(1)(b) to(f)shall terminate on the
person ceasing to be a registered medical practitioner.
Casual Vacancies
7. (1) Where a casual vacancy occurs among the members of the
Council, other than those appointed under section 17(1)(f) or(n),
the Council shall forthwith notify the body or authority which nomi-nated such person and that body or authority shall, as soon as isconvenient, nominate a person or persons which the Minister mayconsider for appointment to fill such vacancy and any person soappointed shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, serve asa member of the Council for such period as is unexpired of the termof office of the person whom the person so appointed replaces.
(2) Where a casual vacancy occurs among the members of the
Council appointed under section 17(1)(f) , the Council, after consul-
tation with the Minister, shall co-opt a registered medical prac-titioner who would, pursuant to the provisions of this Act, be eligiblefor election to fill such vacancy and any practitioner so co-optedshall, subject to the provisions of this Act, serve as a member of theCouncil for such period as is unexpired of the term of office of theperson whom the practitioner so appointed replaces.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(3) Where a casual vacancy occurs among the members of the
Council appointed under section 17(1)(l) , the Minister may appoint
a person who would, pursuant to the provisions of this Act, be eli-gible to fill such vacancy and any person so appointed shall, subjectto the provisions of this Act, serve as a member of the Council forsuch period as is unexpired of the term of office of the person whomthe person so appointed replaces.
Quorum
8. The quorum for a meeting of the Council shall be 7 provided
that, in the case of a meeting of the Council where the matter ofthe imposition of a sanction under Part 9 on a registered medical
practitioner is on the agenda, the quorum shall be 10.
Meetings
9. The Council shall hold at least 4 meetings in every year and
may hold such other meetings as may be necessary for the perform-ance of its functions by video link or by the circulation of papers.
10. The Council may, by notice in writing given to all the members
of the Council, specify the minimum number of meetings of theCouncil which the members are required to attend.
11. The Council may, by notice in writing given to all the members
of a committee, specify the minimum number of meetings of thecommittee which the members are required to attend.
12. A member of the Council given a notice under paragraph 10
or11shall take all necessary steps to comply with the notice.
President and Vice-President
13. (1) Subject to section 17(3) , the Council shall, from time to
time, elect one of its members eligible under that section to be soelected, to be President of the Council and another of its membersto be Vice-President of the Council.
(2) The President and Vice-President of the Council shall each
hold office as such for such term as may be specified by the Councilat the time of their respective appointments unless—
(a) the President or Vice-President, as the case may be, ceases
to be, or becomes disqualified from being, a member ofthe Council,
(b) the President or Vice-President, as the case may be,
resigns that office and the resignation becomes effectiveunder this paragraph, or
(c) the Council by a resolution, for which not less than two-
thirds of the members of the Council vote, and of theintention to propose which not less than 7 days noticeis given to every member of the Council, terminates theappointment of the President or Vice-President.
(3) The President or Vice-President of the Council may at any
time resign from that office by giving notice in writing signed by thePresident or Vice-President, as the case may be, to the Council, butthe resignation shall not become effective until the meeting of theCouncil next held after the receipt by the Council of the notice ofresignation.
91Sch. 2Sch. 2
92[No. 25.] [2007.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(4) Where, at an election of the President or Vice-President of
the Council, there is an equality of votes for 2 or more registeredmedical practitioners, it shall be determined by lot which of thosepractitioners shall be President or Vice-President, as the case may be.
Proceedings at Meetings
14. The proceedings of the Council shall not be invalidated by any
vacancy or vacancies among its members or by any defect in theappointments to the Council or in the qualifications of any memberthereof.
15. The President or, in the absence of the President, the Vice-
President of the Council—
(a) may convene a meeting of the Council,
(b) shall convene a meeting of the Council when requested to
do so by a requisition signed by not less that 6 membersof the Council.
16. (1) Where the President or, in the absence of the President,
the Vice-President of the Council refuses to convene a meeting ofthe Council after a requisition for that purpose signed by not lessthan 6 members of the Council has been presented to the Presidentor Vice-President, as the case may be, any 3 members of the Councilmay forthwith convene a meeting of the Council.
(2) Where the President or, in the absence of the President, the
Vice-President of the Council, without so refusing, does not, within7 days after the presentation of a requisition for that purpose signedby not less than 6 members of the Council, convene a meeting of theCouncil, any 3 members of the Council may, on the expiration ofthose 7 days, convene a meeting of the Council.
17. At least 3 clear days before every meeting of the Council,
notice in writing, signed by the President or Vice-President of theCouncil, as the case may be, or, if the meeting is convened bymembers of the Council, by such members, of the time and place ofthe meeting shall be sent to every member of the Council: if themeeting is convened by members of the Council, the notice con-vening the meeting shall specify the business to be transacted thereat.
18. At a meeting of the Council—
(a) the President of the Council shall, if present, be the
chairperson,
(b) if and so long as the President of the Council is not
present, or if the office of President is vacant, the Vice-President of the Council shall, if present, be thechairperson,
(c) if and so long as the President of the Council is not present
or the office of President is vacant and the Vice-Presidentis not present or the office of Vice-President is vacant,the members of the Council who are present shall electone of their number to be chairperson of that meeting.
19. (1) The Council shall ensure that minutes of each meeting of
the Council are prepared.[2007.] [ No. 25.] Medical Practitioners Act 2007 .
(2) The minutes of a meeting shall be submitted for confirmation
as an accurate record at the next meeting of the Council.
(3) When confirmed, with or without amendment, the minutes of
a meeting shall be signed by the person chairing the meeting at whichthey were submitted for confirmation.
20. The names of all members present at a meeting of the Council
shall be recorded in the minutes of the proceedings of the meeting.
21. Subject to paragraphs 8 and 13(4) , all acts of the Council and
all questions coming or arising before the Council may be done anddecided by a majority of such members of the Council as are presentand vote in relation to the act or matter at a meeting of the Councilduly convened according to law.
22. In the case of an equality of votes on any question arising at
a meeting of the Council (other than the election of the President orthe Vice-President) the chairperson of that meeting shall have asecond or casting vote.
23. Save as is otherwise provided by any enactment, including this
Act, the Council may make standing orders for the regulation of itsproceedings, and may amend or revoke such standing orders.
93Sch. 2