————————
Number 33of2009
————————
EUROPEAN UNION ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definitions.
2. Amendment of section 1 of Act of 1972.3. Amendment of section 2 of Act of 1972.4. Amendment of section 3 of Act of 1972.5. Construction of references.6. Amendment of European Union (Scrutiny) Act 2002.7. Role of Houses of Oireachtas.8. Continuation in force of certain statutory instruments.9. Short title, collective citation and commencement.
————————
12[No. 33.] [2009.] European Union Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
European Communities Act 1972 1972, No. 27
European Communities Act 2007 2007, No. 18European Communities Acts 1972 to 2007European Union (Scrutiny) Act 2002 2002, No. 25Interpretation Act 2005 2005, No. 23————————
Number 33of2009
————————
EUROPEAN UNION ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO MAKE PROVISION WITH RESPECT TO THE
STATE ’S MEMBERSHIP OF THE EUROPEAN UNION;
TO PROVIDE FOR THE APPLICATION UNDER THELAW OF THE STATE OF THE TREATY OF LISBONAMENDING THE TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNIONAND THE TREATY ESTABLISHING THE EUROPEANCOMMUNITY, SIGNED AT LISBON ON THE 13TH DAYOF DECEMBER 2007; FOR THOSE PURPOSES TOAMEND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ACT 1972;AND TO PROVIDE FOR MATTERS CONNECTEDTHEREWITH.
[27th October , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act —
“Act of 1972 ”means the European Communities Act 1972;
“European Union ”has the same meaning as it has in the Act of 1972;
“Minister ”means the Minister for Foreign Affairs; and
“treaties governing the European Union ”has the same meaning as
it has in the Act of 1972.
2.—Section 1 of the Act of 1972 is amended, in subsection (1), by
the insertion of the following definitions:
“‘European Union ’means the European Union, established by
virtue of the Lisbon Treaty, and the European Atomic EnergyCommunity;
‘Lisbon Treaty ’means the Treaty of Lisbon amending the
Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing theEuropean Community, signed at Lisbon on the 13th day ofDecember 2007;
‘treaties governing the European Union ’means —
(a) the Treaty on European Union,
3Definitions.
Amendment of
section 1 of Act of1972.S.2
Amendment of
section 2 of Act of1972.
Amendment of
section 3 of Act of1972.
Construction of
references.
4[No. 33.] [2009.] European Union Act 2009 .
(b) the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union,
(c) the Lisbon Treaty, and
(d) the treaties governing the European Communities,
but shall not include the provisions to which the first paragraph
of Article 275 of the treaty referred to in paragraph ( b)
applies; ”.
3.—Section 2 of the Act of 1972 is amended by the substitution of
the following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) The following shall be binding on the State and shall be
part of the domestic law thereof under the conditions laid downin the treaties governing the European Union:
(a) the treaties governing the European Union;
(b) acts adopted by the institutions of the European
Union (other than acts to which the first paragraphof Article 275 of the Treaty on the Functioning ofthe European Union applies);
(c) acts adopted by the institutions of the European Com-
munities in force immediately before the entry intoforce of the Lisbon Treaty; and
(d) acts adopted by bodies competent under those treat-
ies (other than acts to which the first paragraph ofthe said Article 275 applies). ”.
4.—Section 3 of the Act of 1972 is amended by the substitution,
in paragraph ( a) of subsection (3) (inserted by section 2 of the Euro-
pean Communities Act 2007) of the following subparagraphs for sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii):
“(i) a provision of the treaties governing the European
Union, or
(ii) an act, or provision of an act, adopted by an insti-
tution of the European Union, an institution of theEuropean Communities or a body competent underthose treaties, and ”.
5.—(1) References in any enactment (other than this Act and the
Act of 1972) to the European Communities shall be construed asincluding references to the European Union.
(2) References in any enactment (other than this Act and the Act
of 1972) to the treaties governing the European Communities shallbe construed as references to the treaties governing the EuropeanUnion.
(3) References in any enactment to the Treaty establishing the
European Economic Community or the Treaty establishing theEuropean Community shall be construed as references to the Treatyon the Functioning of the European Union.[2009.] [ No. 33.] European Union Act 2009 .
(4) In this section “enactment ”has the same meaning as it has in
the Interpretation Act 2005.
6.—Section 1 of the European Union (Scrutiny) Act 2002 is
amended by the substitution of the following definition for thedefinition of “measure ”:
“‘measure ’means —
(a) a regulation or directive adopted under the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union,
(b) a decision adopted under Article 28 or 29 of the
Treaty on European Union, or
(c) an act (other than a regulation, directive or decision
referred to in paragraph ( a)o r( b)) requiring the
prior approval of both Houses of the Oireachtas pur-suant to subsection 7 °or 8 °of Article 29.4 of the
Constitution; ”.
7.—(1) ( a) Either House of the Oireachtas may, not later than 6
months after receiving a notification under the third sub-paragraph of Article 48.7 of the Treaty on EuropeanUnion, pass a resolution opposing the adoption of thedecision to which the notification relates.
(b) A resolution referred to in paragraph (a) shall constitute
an opposition to the decision concerned for the purposesof the third subparagraph of Article 48.7 of the Treatyon European Union, and the European Council shall beinformed accordingly thereof.
(2) ( a) Either House of the Oireachtas may, not later than 6
months after receiving a notification under the third sub-paragraph of Article 81.3 of the Treaty on the Func-tioning of the European Union, pass a resolution oppos-ing the adoption of the decision to which thenotification relates.
(b) A resolution referred to in paragraph (a) shall constitute
an opposition to the decision concerned for the purposesof the third subparagraph of Article 81.3 of the Treatyon the Functioning of the European Union, and theCouncil shall be informed accordingly thereof.
(3) Either House of the Oireachtas may, not later than 8 weeks
after the transmission of a draft legislative act referred to in Article6 of Protocol No. 2 to the Treaty on European Union and the Treatyon the Functioning of the European Union, send to the Presidentsof the European Parliament, the Council and the European Com-mission a reasoned opinion in accordance with that Article if theHouse concerned passes a resolution in respect of the draftlegislative act concerned authorising the House to so do.
(4) Where either House of the Oireachtas is of opinion that an
act of an institution of the European Union infringes the principleof subsidiarity provided for in the treaties governing the EuropeanUnion and wishes that proceedings seeking a review of the act con-cerned be brought in the Court of Justice of the European Union inaccordance with Article 263 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
5S.5
Amendment of
European Union(Scrutiny) Act 2002.
Role of Houses of
Oireachtas.S.7
Continuation in
force of certainstatutoryinstruments.
6[No. 33.] [2009.] European Union Act 2009 .
European Union, it shall so notify the Minister in writing for the
purposes of Article 8 of Protocol No. 2 to that treaty and the Treatyon European Union and the Minister shall, as soon as may be afterbeing so notified, arrange for such proceedings to be brought.
8.—(1) Where a European act (in this subsection referred to as a
“repealed act ”), to which effect or further effect has been given, in
whole or in part, by a statutory instrument, is repealed and replacedby another European act (in this subsection referred to as a “codify-
ing act ”) without any material modification of the repealed act, that
statutory instrument shall, upon and after the repeal of the repealedact, have effect as if it had been made for the purpose of giving effector further effect, in whole or in part (as the case may be), to thecodifying act, and accordingly —
(a) references in that statutory instrument to the repealed act
shall be construed as references to the codifying act, and
(b) references in that statutory instrument to a provision of
the repealed act shall be construed as references to theprovision of the codifying act that corresponds, in accord-ance with the codifying act, to the first-mentionedprovision.
(2) Where, before the passing of this Act, a European act (in this
subsection referred to as a “repealed act ”), to which effect or further
effect was given, in whole or in part, by a statutory instrument, wasrepealed and replaced by another European act (in this subsectionreferred to as a “codifying act ”) without any material modification
of the repealed act, that statutory instrument shall, from the date ofthe repeal of the repealed act, be deemed to have been made for thepurpose of giving effect or further effect, in whole or in part (as thecase may be), to the codifying act, and accordingly shall have effect,and be deemed from that date to have had effect, subject to —
(a) references in that statutory instrument to the repealed act
being construed as references to the codifying act, and
(b) references in that statutory instrument to a provision of
the repealed act being construed as references to the pro-vision of the codifying act that corresponds, in accord-ance with the codifying act, to the first-mentionedprovision.
(3) In this section —
“European act ”means —
(a) a provision of the treaties governing the European
Union, or
(b) an act or provision of an act, adopted by an institution
of the European Union, an institution of the EuropeanCommunities or any other body competent under thosetreaties;
“statutory instrument ”means an order, regulation, rule, scheme or
bye-law made in exercise of a power conferred by —
(a) an Act of the Oireachtas (including the Act of 1972), or[2009.] [ No. 33.] European Union Act 2009 .
(b) a statute that was in force immediately before the date of
the coming into force of the Constitution and that con-tinues to be of full force and effect by virtue of Article50 of the Constitution.
9.—(1) This Act may be cited as the European Union Act 2009.
(2) The European Communities Acts 1972 to 2007 and this Act
may be cited together as the European Communities Acts 1972 to2009.
(3) This Act (other than section 8 ) shall come into operation on
such day or days as the Minister may appoint by order or orderseither generally or with reference to any particular purpose or pro-vision and different days may be so appointed for different purposesor provisions.
7S.8
Short title,
collective citationandcommencement.