————————
Number 37of2009
————————
PUBLIC TRANSPORT REGULATION ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title.
2. Definitions.3. Expenses.4. Laying of orders and regulations before the Houses of the
Oireachtas.
PART 2
Licensing of Public Bus Passenger Services
5. Commencement ( Part 2 ).
6. Requirement to be licensed.7. Grant of licences.8. Licence categories and periods of licences.9. Form of application.
10. General provisions for the consideration of applications for
grant of licences.
11. Offer of grant of licence.12. Fees.13. Attachment of conditions to licences.14. Amendment of licence.15. Requirement to commence public bus passenger services.
12[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
16. Renewal of licences.
17. Death of licence holder.18. Transfer of licences.19. Revocation of licences by Authority.20. Licensing of certain existing public bus passenger services.21. Deciding officers.22. Appeals.23. Guidelines.24. Offences body corporate and proceedings for offences.25. General provisions relating to operation of this Part.26. Notifications and notices.27. Transitional provision —application for licence under Act
of 1932.
28. Repeals ( Part 2 ).
PART 3
Amendments to Name and Functions of Dublin Transport
Authority
29. Amendments to the Act of 2008.
30. National Transport Authority.
PART 4
Dissolution of Commission for Taxi Regulation and transfer
of staff and functions of Commission
31. Dissolution of Commission for Taxi Regulation.
32. Transfer of land and other property.
33. Transfer of rights and liabilities.34. Preservation of existing contracts.35. Continuance of legal proceedings.36. References in legislation to Commission.37. Final accounts.38. Admissibility in evidence of documents.39. Transfer of employees of Commission.
40. Transfer of Commissioner for Taxi Regulation to Authority.[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
41. Transfer of functions of Commission to Dublin Transport
Authority.
PART 5
Amendments to Act of 2003 , Act of 1993 , Act of 2000 ,
Transport (Railway Infrastructure) Act 2001 and Roads Act
2007
42. Amendments to enactments and repeals.43. Altered references to Commission and Council in Act of
2003.
44. Amendment of Act of 2000.
PART 6
Miscellaneous
45. Competent authority of Article 6 of Directive 2001/14/EC.46. Measures to enhance public bus services —traffic calming
measures.
SCHEDULE 1
Amendment of certain Acts
PART 1
Amendment of Act of 2003
PART 2
Amendment of Act of 1993
PART 3
Amendment of Transport (Railway Infrastructure) Act 2001
PART 4
Amendment of Roads Act 2007
SCHEDULE 2
Amendment of Act of 2003
————————
34[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005
Carer ’s Leave Act 2001 2001, No. 19
Companies ActsDublin Transport Authority Act 2008 2008, No. 15European Communities Act 1972 1972, No. 27Finance Act 2002 2002, No. 5Housing Act 1966 1966, No. 21Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Maternity Protection Acts 1994 and 2004Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005
Organisation of Working Time Act 1997 1997, No. 20Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006Planning and Development (Strategic Infrastructure) Act
2006 2006, No. 27
Planning and Development Act 2000 2000, No. 30Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act 2003 2003, No. 29Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001 2001, No. 45Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2007Road Traffic Act 1961 1961, No. 24Road Traffic Act 1994 1994, No. 7Road Traffic Act 2006 2006, No. 23Road Traffic and Transport Act 2006 2006, No. 28Road Transport Act 1932 1932, No. 2Road Transport Act 1933 1933, No. 8Roads Act 1993 1993, No. 14Roads Act 2007 2007, No. 34Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Taxi Regulation Act 2003 2003, No. 25Terms of Employment (Information) Acts 1994 and 2001Transport Act 1958 1958, No. 19Transport (Railway Infrastructure) Act 2001 2001, No. 55Transport (Re-organisation of C óras Iompair Éireann)
Act 1986 1986, No. 31
Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2007————————
Number 37of2009
————————
PUBLIC TRANSPORT REGULATION ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE LICENSING OF PUBLIC
BUS PASSENGER SERVICES, TO CHANGE THE NAMEOF THE DUBLIN TRANSPORT AUTHORITY TO THENATIONAL TRANSPORT AUTHORITY, TO PROVIDEFOR THE DISSOLUTION OF THE COMMISSION FORTAXI REGULATION, TO AMEND THE TAXI REGU-LATION ACT 2003, THE DUBLIN TRANSPORT AUTH-ORITY ACT 2008 AND CERTAIN OTHER ENACTMENTSAND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[27th November , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—This Act may be cited as the Public Transport Regulation
Act 2009.
2.—In this Act —
“Act of 1932 ”means Road Transport Act 1932;
“Act of 1986 ”means Transport (Re-organisation of C óras Iompair
Éireann) Act 1986;
“Act of 1993 ”means Roads Act 1993;
“Act of 2000 ”means Planning and Development Act 2000;
“Act of 2003 ”means Taxi Regulation Act 2003;
“Act of 2006 ”means Planning and Development (Strategic
Infrastructure) Act 2006;
“Act of 2008 ”means Dublin Transport Authority Act 2008;
“Authority ”means Dublin Transport Authority, until the day
appointed as the appointed day for the purposes of section 30, and
from that day National Transport Authority;
5Short title.
Definitions.Pt.1 S.2
6[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
“bus”means a mechanically propelled vehicle designed for travel by
road having seating accommodation for more than 9 persons(including the driver);
“Commission ”means Commission for Taxi Regulation;
“dissolution day ”means the day appointed by the Minister by order
under section 31 for the dissolution of the Commission for Taxi
Regulation;
“GDA ”means Greater Dublin Area;
“licence ”means a licence to provide a public bus passenger service
granted under Part 2 , other than a licence granted under the Road
Transport Act 1932 or an international service provided under inter-national agreements or extant EU legislation or rules;
“international service ”means a service authorised under Council
Regulation (EEC) No. 684/92 of 16 March 1992 on common rulesfor the international carriage of passengers by coach and bus or theAgreement on the International Carriage of Passengers by Road bymeans of Occasional Coach and Bus Services (ASOR), or the Agree-ment on the international occasional carriage of passengers by coachand bus (Interbus Agreement) or any other International Agreementrelating to bus passenger services between the State and othercountries;
“Minister ”means Minister for Transport;
“National Spatial Strategy ”means the National Spatial Strategy:
2002-2020 published by the Government on 28 November 2002 orany document published by the Government which amends orreplaces it;
“public bus passenger service ”means the use of a bus or buses travel-
ling wholly or mainly on public roads for the carriage of passengersin such a manner that —
(a) each journey is open to use by members of the public,
(b) a charge or charges are paid in respect of each passenger,
and
(c) save where the Authority otherwise determines,
(i) the service is provided on a regular and scheduled
basis, and
(ii) carriage is provided for passengers between specified
terminal points or along a specified route or other-wise in accordance with a published timetable,
and is not a bus service solely for carrying children to or from school;“public transport services contract ”has the meaning assigned to it
by section 47 of the Act of 2008;
“public road ”has the meaning assigned to it by the Act of 1993;
“public service obligation ”has the meaning assigned to it by section
47 of the Act of 2008;
“road passenger transport operator ’s licence ”means a national or
international road passenger transport operator ’s licence within the
meaning of section 2 of the Road Traffic and Transport Act 2006;[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
“Transport 21 ”means the capital investment framework published
by the Minister in November 2005.
3.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of monies provided by the Oireachtas.
4.—(1) Every order (other than an order under sections 5, 29, 30,
31, 44 and 46) or regulation made by the Minister under this Act
shall be laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practi-cable after it is made.
(2) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 days after the day on which a regulation or an order is laidbefore it under this section, annul the regulation or order.
(3) The annulment of a regulation or an order under subsection
(2)takes effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-
cerned, but does not affect the validity of anything done under theregulation or order before the passing of that resolution.
PART 2
Licensing of Public Bus Passenger Services
5.—This Part comes into operation on such day or days as may be
fixed therefor by order or orders by the Minister, either generally orwith reference to any particular purpose or provision, and differentdays may be so fixed for different purposes and different provisionsof this Act.
6.—(1) Subject to section 20 , a public bus passenger service, other
than such a service that is the subject of a public transport servicescontract entered into under section 48 of the Act of 2008 or an inter-national service, may only be provided in accordance with a licence.
(2) A person who provides a public bus passenger service that is
in contravention of subsection (1) commits an offence.
7.—(1) Subject to this Part, the Authority may grant a licence in
respect of a public bus passenger service.
(2) A licence shall specify the route that the public bus passenger
service to which it relates must follow, the commencement and com-pletion points of the service and any stopping points along the route.
(3) Where it is appropriate having regard to the category of public
bus passenger service to which the licence refers, the licence mayspecify requirements in relation to the scheduling and frequency ofoperation of the public bus passenger service to which it relates.
(4) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , where the holder of a licence
does not comply with a requirement specified in thelicence under subsections (2) or(3), he or she commits
an offence.
7Pt.1 S.2
Expenses.
Laying of orders
and regulationsbefore the Housesof the Oireachtas.
Commencement
(Part 2 ).
Requirement to be
licensed.
Grant of licences.Pt.2 S.7
Licence categories
and periods oflicences.
Form of
application.
General provisions
for theconsideration ofapplications forgrant of licences.
8[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(b) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under
this section that a temporary alteration to the service inquestion had been made having regard to circumstancesset out in guidelines prepared under section 23 .
8.—(1) ( a) The Authority may specify different categories of public
bus passenger services in respect of which licences maybe granted and shall set out details of such categories inguidelines prepared under section 23 .
(b) In specifying categories under paragraph (a) , the Auth-
ority may, among other things, have regard to differenttypes of services, the frequency of services, the schedulingof services and the time of year within which particularcategories of services shall operate.
(2) The Authority shall determine the period of validity for
licences and, where it specifies different categories of public bus pass-enger services under subsection (1) , it may determine different
periods of validity in respect of each category, subject in all instancesto a maximum of 5 years.
9.—(1) An application for the grant of a licence shall be made to
the Authority in such a form and manner and be accompanied bydocuments and other supporting information as the Authority maydetermine from time to time and the appropriate fee determinedunder section 12 .
(2) Where an application for the grant of a licence is not made in
full compliance with requirements determined by the Authorityunder subsection (1) , the Authority shall notify the applicant for the
licence of a final date for the receipt of the complete application andthe Authority will not be obliged to consider the application furtherif the full application is not received on or before that date.
10.—(1) In considering an application for the grant of a licence
the Authority, having regard to the general objectives establishedunder section 10 of the Act of 2008 —
(a) shall take account of the demand or potential demand that
exists for the public bus passenger services to which theapplication refers having regard to the needs of con-sumers and any existing public bus passenger services onor in the vicinity of the route to be served by the pro-posed public bus passenger services, and
(b) save where the application is in respect of a category of
licence where the Authority deems it not to be appro-priate, shall take account of any or all of the following:
(i) the need to provide a well-functioning, attractive,
competitive, integrated and safe public transportsystem of services and networks for all users,
(ii) the need for the preservation of good order and safety
on public roads,
(iii) the impact a proposed public bus passenger service
would have on public passenger transport services[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
that are subject to a public transport services con-
tract under Part 3, Chapter 2 of the Act of 2008 onor in the vicinity of the proposed route,
(iv) the contribution the proposed public bus passenger
service would have in achieving an increase in theavailability of public transport services for the public,
(v) the National Spatial Strategy,
(vi) the Sustainable Travel and Transport Action Plan
for Ireland,
(vii) relevant regional planning guidelines under Chapter
III of Part II of the Act of 2000,
(viii) Transport 21 or any subsequent capital investment
framework for transport published by the Ministeror Government,
(ix) demographic, economic and social trends,
(x) national and regional tourism strategies and plans,
and
(xi) local authority development plans.
(2) For the purpose of considering an application for the grant of
a licence, the Authority may —
(a) examine any submission made to it by or on behalf of
the applicant,
(b) seek the submission of information from the applicant or
any other party, including any local authority (within themeaning of the Local Government Act 2001) in whosefunctional area the proposed public bus passenger servicewill operate, or
(c) examine any other matter that it deems to be relevant to
the public interest in the consideration of an application.
(3) An application for the grant of a licence shall not be con-
sidered unless the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of theAuthority that —
(a) he or she has or has the capacity to obtain the necessary
financial and other resources required to provide the pro-posed public bus passenger service,
(b) he or she has complied with national and international
legislation on road transport, and
(c) he or she holds a current tax clearance certificate issued
under section 1095 (inserted by section 127 of the FinanceAct 2002) of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997.
(4) The Authority may provide guidance to applicants in relation
to the consideration of applications under this section in guidelinesmade under section 23 .
(5) Where, following its consideration of an application, the Auth-
ority determines that the public bus passenger service to which the
9Pt.2 S.10Pt.2 S.10
Offer of grant of
licence.
Fees.
Attachment of
conditions tolicences.
10[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
application relates is warranted, and the applicant establishes com-
pliance with subsection (3) to the satisfaction of the Authority, the
Authority shall grant a licence.
(6) Where the Authority decides not to grant a licence, it shall
inform the applicant setting out the reasons for that decision.
11.—(1) The Authority may decide prior to the grant of any
licence, or of licences in respect of particular categories of public buspassenger services, to make an offer to the applicant setting out —
(a) the details of the public bus passenger service in respect
of which it is proposed to grant the licence,
(b) the conditions under section 13 that it is proposed to apply
to the operation of the public bus passenger service,
(c) the documents and other information that must be submit-
ted by the applicant prior to the grant of the licence,
(d) the fee determined under section 12 that must be paid
prior to the grant of the licence, and
(e) the period within which the applicant must respond in
writing to the making of the offer indicating acceptanceof that offer.
(2) Where an applicant does not comply with subsection (1) in full
within the period established under that subsection, the offer shallcease to have effect and the Authority shall inform the applicant thatthe application shall receive no further consideration.
12.—(1) The Authority shall determine from time to time the
level of fees to be charged for the making of an application for andthe grant of a licence and for an application to amend, transfer orrenew a licence and may determine different levels of fees in respectof each category of public bus passenger service specified undersection 8 .
(2) An application for the grant of a licence, to amend, transfer
or to renew a licence, will not be considered until the appropriatefee has been paid.
(3) No fee shall be refundable to an applicant under any cir-
cumstances.
(4) The fees determined by the Authority under this section shall
accrue to the Authority and shall be applied for the purpose of meet-ing the expenses properly incurred by the Authority in the dischargeof its functions.
13.—(1) When granting, amending or renewing a licence, the
Authority may apply conditions to the licence in respect of the oper-ation of the public bus passenger service to which it relates.
(2) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (1) , the Auth-
ority may impose conditions that relate to —
(a) compliance by the applicant or licence holder at all times
with the requirements of section 10(3),[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(b) the scheduling and frequency of bus services, including
variations of such frequencies on different days or atdifferent periods of each day,
(c) the route to be taken by the service,
(d) the stopping places on the route for the service, including
conditions relating to access to or egress from the serviceat specified points,
(e) the commencement and completion points of the service,
(f) the ticketing for services, including where appropriate, the
integration of ticketing with other transport services pro-vided by the applicant or other public transport serviceoperators,
(g) the provision of ticket dispensing machines or other ticket-
ing, including integrated ticketing, equipment,
(h) the minimum number of vehicles that must be kept avail-
able for deployment in the provision of the service, and
(i) the minimum accessibility standards and emission stan-
dards for pollutants and noise to be complied with byvehicles deployed in the provision of the service.
(3) The Authority may require that a timetable for a public bus
passenger service be provided by the applicant and that such time-table be displayed for the information of the public at places and insuch a manner as it determines.
(4) Save where the Authority deems it not to be appropriate, the
Authority shall require that a licence, or a document displayingdetails of a licence in a format it has approved, must be displayed inthe vehicle being used to provide a public bus passenger service andmay set out the locations and method for that display.
(5) The Authority may publish the timetable of any public bus
passenger service in respect of which a licence has been granted inany format using any means, including electronic, that it sees fit.
(6) The Authority may establish different and separate conditions
in relation to different categories of public bus passenger services.
(7) A licence holder or a person acting on behalf of a licence
holder who in the provision of a public bus passenger service doesnot comply with a condition applied to a licence commits an offence.
14.—(1) Where the holder of a licence proposes to alter a public
bus passenger service in respect of which a licence has been granted,the holder must apply to the Authority for the grant of an amend-ment to that licence.
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be made in a form
and manner and be accompanied by documents, the appropriate feeand other supporting information as the Authority may determinefrom time to time.
(3) Sections 10 to13apply to applications made under subsec-
tion (1) .
11Pt.2 S.13
Amendment of
licence.Pt.2 S.14
Requirement to
commence publicbus passengerservices.
Renewal of
licences.
12[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(4) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , where the holder of a licence
alters a public bus passenger service without obtaining anamended licence under subsection (1) , the holder com-
mits an offence.
(b) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under
this section that a temporary alteration to the service inquestion had been made having regard to circumstancesset out in guidelines prepared under section 23 .
15.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the holder of a licence must
commence the public bus passenger service within 4 months of thedate on which the licence in respect of the service was granted oramended by the Authority.
(2) The Authority may at the request of the licence holder and
having satisfied itself as to the validity of the reasons for the request,extend the period referred to in subsection (1) to a date that it shall
determine and shall advise the applicant accordingly.
(3) The licence holder shall provide confirmation to the Authority
of the commencement of a public bus passenger service within theperiod set out in subsection (1) or determined under subsection (2) .
(4) Where a licence holder fails to comply with the requirement
set out in subsection (3) , or where the Authority becomes aware of
the fact that a public bus passenger service has not been commencedby the appropriate date, it shall notify the licence holder that thelicence will be revoked on a date that is 14 days following that notifi-cation unless the licence holder provides proof of the commencementof the service before that date.
16.—(1) The holder of a licence may apply to the Authority for
the renewal of the licence and the Authority may either renew orrefuse to renew the licence.
(2) ( a) An application for the renewal of a licence shall be made
in a form and manner and be accompanied by other sup-porting information as the Authority may determinefrom time to time and the fee relevant to the applicationfor the renewal of a licence determined under section 12 .
(b) Where an application for the renewal of a licence is not
made in full compliance with paragraph (a) , the Auth-
ority shall notify the holder of the licence of a final datefor the receipt of the complete application and that noconsideration of the application will be given if the fullapplication is not received on or before that date.
(3) In considering an application for the renewal of a licence the
Authority shall —
(a) have regard to the degree to which the public bus passen-
ger service has been provided having regard to the termsand conditions of the licence, and
(b) apply the provisions of sections 10 to13as it deems
appropriate.
(4) Every renewal of a licence shall commence immediately upon
the expiration of the licence or the last renewal of the licence (as the[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
case may be) of which it is a renewal and, unless it is previously
revoked under section 19 , shall continue in force for the period of
validity specified by the Authority, such period not being more than5 years.
17.—(1) In this section “personal representative ”means the
executor, administrator or another person identified in the will ofthe licence holder or in letters of administration relating to theadministration of the estate of the licence holder for the purpose ofcontinuing the operation of the public bus passenger service to whicha licence relates.
(2) In the event of the death of a licence holder, his or her per-
sonal representative may carry on the public bus passenger serviceto which the licence relates under that licence until the expiry ofthe licence.
(3) The personal representative of a licence holder may apply for
the renewal of the licence under section 16 and shall on the renewal
of the licence be the licence holder.
18.—(1) Where the ownership of a licensed public bus passenger
service is transferred to another person, the Authority may, on theapplication of that person and payment of the appropriate fee, sub-ject to subsection (2) , transfer the licence to that person.
(2) An application made under subsection (1) shall be considered
in accordance with section 10(2) and (3).
(3) The transfer of a licence under this section does not affect the
period of validity of the licence.
(4) ( a) Save as is provided for in this section or in section 17 ,a
licence shall not be transferred by the licence holder toanother person.
(b) Where the Authority becomes aware of the transfer of a
licence other than as is provided for in this section or insection 17 , it shall revoke the licence with immediate
effect.
19.—(1) The Authority may revoke a licence —
(a) where the licence holder requests that a licence be
revoked,
(b) where the Authority is satisfied that the public bus passen-
ger service in respect of which the licence was granted isnot being provided,
(c) in the circumstances set out in sections 15(4) and
18(4)(b) ,o r
(d) following a conviction for an offence under this Part.
(2) ( a) Where the Authority proposes to revoke a licence in
accordance with subsection (1)(b) ,(c)or(d), it shall give
14 days notice of its intention to the licence holder andshall invite the holder to make written submissions to it
13Pt.2 S.16
Death of licence
holder.
Transfer of licences.
Revocation of
licences byAuthority.Pt.2 S.19
Licensing of certain
existing public buspassenger services.
Deciding officers.
Appeals.
14[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
which it shall consider before making a determination
to revoke.
(b) Where having considered submissions under paragraph
(a), the Authority determines that the licence should be
revoked, it shall advise the holder in writing that therevocation shall have effect 14 days following the date ofthat communication.
(3) The Authority shall from time to time publish details of the
offences in respect of which it may revoke a licence under subsec-
tion (1)(d) .
(4) Where a road passenger transport operator ’s licence is
revoked or withdrawn under an act of an institution of the EuropeanCommunities in relation to road passenger transport, under an Actof the Oireachtas in relation to road passenger transport, or underany regulation made under section 3 of the European CommunitiesAct 1972 giving effect to an act of an institution of the EuropeanCommunities in relation to road passenger transport, a licencegranted under this Part to the person who held the road passengertransport operator ’s licence concerned stands revoked.
(5) A person who continues to provide a public bus passenger
service in respect of which a licence has been revoked under thissection, commits an offence.
20.—(1) Public bus passenger services being provided by Bus
Éireann and Dublin Bus on the day of the commencement of this
section, that are not subject to a contract under Part 3, Chapter 2 ofthe Act of 2008, may continue to operate until such time, not beinglonger than 2 years after that day, as the Authority grants a licence.
(2) The Authority shall grant a licence in respect of the public
bus passenger services referred to in subsection (1) , notwithstanding
section 9 , and such initial licences shall be of not more than one year
in duration and may be subsequently renewed under section 16 .
(3) All licences granted under the Act of 1932 which are in force
on the day of the commencement of this section, shall continue inforce to a date to be determined by the Authority, which shall notbe more than 2 years after the day of the next anniversary of thedate of the grant or renewal of the licence under the Act of 1932,and may be renewed under section 16 .
21.—The Authority shall designate in writing persons to be decid-
ing officers for the purpose of deciding on applications for the grant,amendment, renewal, transfer or revocation of licences.
22.—(1) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , an applicant for the grant,
amendment, renewal or transfer of a licence, or theholder of a licence where a licence is revoked undersection 19(1)(b) , may appeal to the Authority in writing
against a decision or part of it taken by a deciding officerunder this Part within 21 days of the date of the noticeof that decision.
(b) An appeal under paragraph (a) shall set out the grounds
for the appeal and, in the absence of such grounds, theappeal will not be considered.[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall appoint an officer of the
Authority of a rank that is the same or higher than the decidingofficer who made the decision that gave rise to the appeal, to be anappeals officer to consider and decide on the appeal.
(3) The functions of the appeals officer appointed under subsec-
tion (2) shall be to consider and make a decision on appeals made
under subsection (1) .
(4) Appeals officers shall, subject to this Part, be independent in
the performance of their functions.
(5) ( a) Before considering an appeal under subsection (1) ,a n
appeals officer shall invite submissions in writing fromany party who had notified an interest in the originaldecision that gave rise to the appeal and shall providesuch parties with a copy of the appeal made under subsec-
tion (1) .
(b) A submission under paragraph (a) must be received by the
appeals officer on or before a date specified by thatofficer (which shall be not less than 14 days after the dateof the invitation referred to in paragraph (a) ).
(c) Where submissions are made under paragraph (a) , they
shall be copied by the appeals officer to the appellantwho may submit observations in writing in relation tosuch submissions which must be received by the appealsofficer on or before a date specified by that officer (whichshall be not less than 14 days after the date on which thesubmissions were copied to the appellant).
(6) ( a) The decision of an appeals officer and the reasons for
making that decision shall be notified in writing to theappellant and to any other parties who made a sub-mission under subsection (5) .
(b) A document purporting to be a decision made under this
section by an appeals officer and to be signed by him orher shall be prima facie evidence of the making of the
decision without proof of the signature of such officer orhis or her official capacity.
(c) The decision of an appeals officer on any appeal referred
to him or her under subsection (2) , subject to subsections
(7), (8) and (9), is final and conclusive.
(7) ( a) Where an appellant has been notified under subsection (6)
of the decision of an appeals officer and is dissatisfiedwith that decision, the appellant may, within 14 days afterthe date of the notification, appeal to the judge of theCircuit Court in whose Circuit the appellant resides orprincipally carries on business against the decision.
(b) Where an appellant appeals to the judge of the Circuit
Court under paragraph (a) , the appellant shall at the
same time notify the Authority in writing of that appeal.
(8) The decision of the appeals officer stands suspended until the
appeal to the Circuit Court has been determined or withdrawn.
(9) On the hearing of an appeal under subsection (7) in relation
to the decision of the appeals officer under subsection (3) , the Court
15Pt.2 S.22Pt.2 S.22
Guidelines.
16[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
may either confirm the decision or allow the appeal. If the appeal is
allowed in relation to a decision to refuse to grant a licence, theAuthority shall, upon notification to it by the Court, grant thelicence.
23.—(1) The Authority shall from time to time prepare and pub-
lish guidelines in relation to the licensing of public bus passengerservices under this Part.
(2) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (1) , guidelines
under this section —
(a) shall include the criteria the Authority proposes to apply
to the consideration of applications for the grant oflicences under section 10 , and
(b) may set out the circumstances where a temporary alter-
ation of a public bus passenger service does not necessi-tate the grant of an amendment to a licence under section
14, and
(c) may refer to matters relating to the application for, grant,
renewal, transfer or amendment of a licence, includingthe processes relating to applications, such as the time-frames for the consideration of applications, for the grant,renewal, transfer and amendment of licences, and theconditions that may be applied in respect of a licence.
(3) The Authority may amend any provision contained in guide-
lines published under this section and shall publish any suchamendment.
(4) Before publishing guidelines or any part of them or amend-
ments to guidelines, under this section, the Authority —
(a) shall submit a draft of the proposals to the Minister for
any views to be given in writing to the Authority withinone month of the request,
(b) shall submit a draft of the proposals to the Joint
Oireachtas Committee for its opinion and request thatany such opinion be given in writing to the Authoritywithin one month of the request,
(c) shall submit a draft of the proposals to the Competition
Authority for its opinion as to whether any provision ofthe draft would, if given effect, be likely to result in com-petition being prevented, restricted or distorted, andrequest that any such opinion be given in writing to theAuthority within one month of the request,
(d) shall publish, in such manner as the Authority considers
appropriate, a draft of the proposals and shall give per-sons at least one month from the date of publication ofthe draft within which to make written representations inrelation to the draft, and
(e) following the consultation at paragraphs (a) ,(b),(c)and
(d), and having considered any views given by the Mini-
ster under paragraph (a) , any opinion given to it by the
Joint Oireachtas Committee under paragraph (b) and the[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
Competition Authority under paragraph (c) and the rep-
resentations made under paragraph (d) , if any, shall pub-
lish the guidelines or parts or amendments of them withor without modification.
(5) Guidelines prepared and published by the Authority under
this section shall be laid before each of the Houses of the Oireachtasby the Authority.
(6) The Authority shall cause notice of the publication of guide-
lines under this section to be placed in one or more national news-papers and on its website on the internet.
(7) In this section “Joint Oireachtas Committee ”means a Joint
Committee of the Houses of the Oireachtas to which the Oireachtashas assigned the role of examining matters relating to transport.
24.—(1) A person who commits an offence under this Part is
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000.
(2) Where an offence under this Part is committed by a body cor-
porate and is proved to have been committed with the consent of orto be attributable to any neglect on the part of any person, being adirector, manager, secretary or other officer of the body corporateor a person who was purporting to act in such capacity, that person,as well as the body corporate, commits an offence and is liable to beprosecuted against and punished as if he or she were committing thefirst mentioned offence.
(3) Proceedings for an offence under this Part may be brought
and prosecuted by the Authority.
25.—(1) The Authority shall carry out a review of the operation
of this Part not later than 5 years after the commencement of thissection and at least once every 5 years thereafter.
(2) The Authority shall submit a report to the Minister of the
findings of a review carried out under subsection (1) .
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1) , the Minister may from time
to time request the Authority to carry out a review of its operationof any or all of the provisions of this Part and make a report to himor her of the findings of that review.
(4) Nothing in this Part affects in any way the powers given to the
Minister under section 26 of the Act of 1986 to give policy directionsto C óras Iompair Éireann.
26.—(1) Where a notice is required to be given by the Authority
under this Part to a person, it shall be addressed to the person andshall be given to the person in one of the following ways —
(a) by delivering it to the person,
(b) by leaving it at the address at which the person carries
on business,
(c) by sending it by post in a pre-paid registered letter
addressed to the person at the address at which the per-son carries on business,
17Pt.2 S.23
Offences body
corporate andproceedings foroffences.
General provisions
relating tooperation of thisPart.
Notifications and
notices.Pt.2 S.26
Transitional
provision —
application forlicence under Actof 1932.
Repeals ( Part 2 ).
18[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(d) if an address for the service of a notice has been furnished
by the person, by leaving it at, or sending it by pre-paidregistered post addressed to the person to, that address,or
(e) by sending it by means of electronic mail or a facsimile
machine, to a device or facility for the reception of elec-tronic mail or facsimiles located at the address at whichthe person carries on business or, if an address for theservice of a notice has been furnished by the person, thataddress, but only if —
(i) the sender ’s—
(I) facility for the reception of electronic mail gener-
ates a message confirming a receipt of the elec-tronic mail, or
(II) facsimile machine generates a message con-
firming successful transmission of the totalnumber of pages of the notice,
and
(ii) the notice is also given in one of the other ways men-
tioned in any of the preceding paragraphs.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) , a company registered
under the Companies Acts is deemed to be ordinarily resident at itsregistered office, and every other body corporate and every unincor-porated body is deemed to be ordinarily resident at its principaloffice or place of business.
(3) A copy of a notification or notice, which has endorsed on it a
certificate purporting to be signed by an officer of the Authoritystating that the copy is a true copy of the notification may, withoutproof of signature of that person, be produced in every court and inall legal proceedings and is evidence, unless the contrary is shown,of the notification.
27.—(1) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 1932 under
section 28(a) , where a person has made an application for a licence
under that Act before its repeal, the application shall be consideredunder that Act by the Authority and any reference in that Act to theMinister in respect of the application shall be read as a reference tothe Authority.
(2) Where an application for a licence under the Act of 1932 is
dealt with under subsection (1) and the licence is granted, the licence
is deemed to be a licence granted under this Part and to be in forceto a date to be determined by the Authority, which shall not be morethan 2 years after the day of the next anniversary of the date of thegrant of the licence under the Act of 1932 and may be renewed undersection 16 .
28.—The following are repealed:
(a) the Road Transport Act 1932,
(b) sections 66 to 73 of the Road Transport Act 1933, and[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(c) sections 24 and 25 of the Transport Act 1958.
PART 3
Amendments to Name and Functions of Dublin Transport
Authority
29.—(1) The Act of 2008 is amended —
(a) in section 2 —
(i) by the insertion after the definition of “Act of 2002 ”
of the following:
“‘Act of 2003 ’means Taxi Regulation Act 2003; ”,
(ii) by the insertion after the definition of “cycleway ”of
the following:
“‘dissolution day for the Commission for Taxi Regu-
lation ’means the day appointed by the Minister by
order under section 31 of the Public Transport Regu-
lation Act 2009 for the dissolution of the Commission
for Taxi Regulation; ”,
and
(iii) by the substitution for the definition of “local auth-
ority ”of the following:
“‘local authority ’has the meaning assigned to it by
the Local Government Act 2001, other than in thecontext of the exercise of functions under the Act of2003 where it has the meaning in section 2(1) of thatAct.”,
(b) in section 9, by substituting for subsection (2) the
following:
“(2) The functional area of the Authority is —
(a) in relation to the exercise of its functions under
Part 3, Chapter 2 of this Act, under Part 2 of
thePublic Transport Regulation Act 2009 and
under the Act of 2003, the State,
(b) in relation to all its other functions, the GDA. ”,
(c) by substituting for section 10 the following:
“10.—In exercising its functions the Authority shall seek
to achieve the following objectives —
(a) the development of an integrated transport
system which contributes to environmental sus-tainability and social cohesion and promoteseconomic progress,
(b) the provision of a well-functioning, attractive,
integrated and safe public transport system ofservices and networks for all users,
19Pt.2 S.28
Amendments to the
Act of 2008.Pt.3 S.29
20[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(c) improved access to the transport system and, in
particular, to public passenger transportservices by persons with disabilities,
(d) increased use of the public transport system,
(e) regulated competition in the provision of
licensed public bus passenger services in thepublic interest,
(f) the objectives set out in section 9 of the Act
of 2003,
(g) increased recourse to cycling and walking as
means of transport, and
(h) value for money. ”,
(d) in section 11(1), by inserting after paragraph ( c) the
following:
“(ca) license public bus passenger services that are
not subject to a public transport services con-tract under section 48,
(cb) develop and maintain a regulatory framework
for the control and operation of small publicservice vehicles and their drivers in accordancewith the provisions of the Act of 2003, ”,
(e) in section 14 —
(i) in subsection (1), by substituting “11”for“9”, and
(ii) in subsection (2)( d), by substituting “8”for“6”,
(f) in section 21(7) and (8), by inserting “and sections 39 and
40of the Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 ”after
“110”and “or the dissolution day for the Commission for
Taxi Regulation, or on the day or days specified by theMinister under section 110(1)( e), as appropriate ”after
“dissolution day ”in each place it occurs,
(g) in section 48, by inserting after subsection (11) the
following:
“(12) Where the Authority proposes to enter into a
public transport services contract, other than a directaward contract to which section 52(3) refers, it shall —
(a) advise any local authority in whose functional
area the transport service will operate of theproposal to enter into such a contract, and
(b) invite any such local authority to submit written
views in relation to the proposed contract,which it will consider prior to entering intothe contract. ”,
(h) in sections 48, 52 and 54, by substituting “public bus
services ”for“public bus passenger services ”,
(i) in section 52 —[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(i) by deleting “within the GDA ”in paragraph (1)( b)
and paragraph (3)( a), and
(ii) by deleting “, in the GDA ”in subsection (2),
(j) by the repeal of section 54,
(k) in section 74(6)( a), by substituting “prepare ”for“make ”,
(l) in section 76 —
(i) by substituting “the Road Safety Authority ”for“a
consultative body ”in subsection (3), and
(ii) by deleting subsections (4) and (5),
(m) in section 78(1), by inserting “of its functions under this
Act, under Part 3 of the Act of 2003 with particular refer-ence to section 49 of that Act or under Part 2 of the
Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .”for“of its func-
tions under this Act. ”.
(2) This section comes into operation on such day or days as may
be fixed therefor by order or orders of the Minister and differentdays may be fixed for different amendments effected by this section.
30.—(1) The name of the Dublin Transport Authority is changed,
on the appointed day, and it shall be known, in the English language,as the National Transport Authority or, in the Irish language, AntÚdarásNáisiúnta Iompair.
(2) References in the Act of 2008, in this Act or in any other Act
to the Dublin Transport Authority or to the Authority shall from theappointed day be construed as references to the National TransportAuthority.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 63 of the Act of
2008, the National Transport Authority shall, at any time at thedirection of the Minister, submit a report to the Minister setting outrecommendations in relation to the expansion of its functions, func-tional area and remit with a view to giving it a national remit inrespect of all of its powers, duties and functions under the Act of2008 and this Act.
(4) The Minister may by order appoint a day to be the appointed
day for the purposes of this section.
PART 4
Dissolution of Commission for Taxi Regulation and transfer
of staff and functions of Commission
31.—The Commission for Taxi Regulation is dissolved, at the
request of the Authority, on such day as the Minister appoints byorder.
32.—(1) On the dissolution day, all land which, immediately
before that day, was vested in the Commission and all rights, powersand privileges relating to or connected with that land shall, without
21Pt.3 S.29
National Transport
Authority.
Dissolution of
Commission forTaxi Regulation.
Transfer of land
and other property.Pt.4 S.32
Transfer of rights
and liabilities.
Preservation of
existing contracts.
Continuance of
legal proceedings.
References in
legislation toCommission.
Final accounts.
22[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
any conveyance, transfer or assignment, stand vested in the Auth-
ority for all the estate or interest for which it was vested in the Com-mission but subject to all trusts and equities affecting that land sub-sisting and capable of being performed.
(2) On the dissolution day, all property other than land (including
chose-in-action), which, immediately before that day, was the prop-erty of the Commission shall, without any transfer or assignment,stand transferred to the Authority.
(3) Every chose-in-action transferred by subsection (2) may, on
and after the dissolution day, be sued upon, recovered or enforcedby the Authority in its own name and it shall not be necessary forthe Authority to give notice to the person bound by any such chose-in-action of the transfer effected by this section.
(4) All moneys, stocks, shares and securities transferred to the
Authority by subsection (2) which, immediately before the dissol-
ution day, are in the name of the Commission shall, upon the requestof the Authority, be transferred into its name.
33.—All rights and liabilities held, enjoyed, or incurred by virtue
of any contract or commitment (expressed or implied) entered intoby the Commission shall, on the dissolution day, subject where neces-sary to transfer in the books of any bank, corporation or company,stand transferred to the Authority.
34.—(1) Every bond, guarantee or other security of a continuing
character made or given by the Commission to another person or byany person to the Commission and in force immediately before thedissolution day and every contract or agreement in writing madebetween the Commission and any other person and not fullyexecuted and completed before the dissolution day, notwithstandingthe dissolution of the Commission, continues in force on and afterthe dissolution day but shall be construed and have effect as if theAuthority was substituted therein for the Commission.
(2) Every other document granted or made by the Commission
which is in force immediately before the dissolution day continues in
force on and after that day as if it had been granted or made by theAuthority and shall be construed and have effect and be enforceableby or against the Authority.
35.—In all legal proceedings to which the Commission was a party
and pending immediately before the dissolution day, the name of theAuthority shall be substituted in the proceedings for the Commissionand the proceedings shall not abate by reason of such substitution.
36.—References to the Commission contained, immediately before
the dissolution day, in any statute or statutory instrument madeunder statute or in the memorandum or articles of association of anycompany shall, in so far as they relate to anything transferred by thisAct be read on and after that day as references to the Authority.
37.—(1) Final accounts in respect of the Commission shall be
drawn up.[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(2) Notwithstanding section 31, the Taxi Regulation Act 2003
(Part 2) (Establishment Day) Order 2004 (S.I. No. 523 of 2004) con-tinues in force and has effect in relation to accounts drawn up undersubsection (1).
38.—(1) All books and other documents directed or authorised
by or under any enactment to be kept by the Commission and which,immediately before the dissolution day, would be receivable in evi-dence shall, notwithstanding the dissolution of the Commission, beadmitted in evidence on or after the dissolution day as if this Parthad not been enacted.
(2) Whenever an extract from or certificate of the contents of any
book or other document directed or authorised by or under anyenactment to be kept by the Commission would, if verified in a part-icular manner by a particular officer of that body, have been admiss-ible immediately before the dissolution day as evidence of those con-tents, an extract from or certificate of the contents of that book ordocument shall, if verified in such particular manner by an officer ofthe Authority (whose official position it shall not be necessary toprove) authorised by the Authority in that behalf, be admitted, onor after the dissolution day, as evidence of such contents to the sameextent as such first-mentioned extract or certificate would have beenso admitted if this Part had not been enacted.
(3) A copy of or extract from any document referred to in subsec-
tion (1) produced by the Authority and certified to be a true copy
under the hand of an officer of that Authority (whose official posi-tion it shall not be necessary to prove) authorised by the Authorityfor that purpose shall in all legal proceedings be admissible in evi-dence as of equal validity with the original document and no processfor compelling the production of any such document by the Auth-ority shall issue from any court except with the leave of that court.
39.—(1) Each person who, immediately before the dissolution
day, was serving as a Commissioner for Taxi Regulation followinghis or her appointment under section 14 of the Act of 2003 and eachperson appointed under section 18 of the Act of 2003 to be a memberof the staff of the Commission is, on that day, transferred to andbecomes an employee of the Authority.
(2) Except in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated
with a recognised trade union or association of employees, a persontransferred under this section is entitled, while in the employment ofthe Authority, to terms and conditions of employment no less favour-able than those to which the person was entitled immediately beforethe dissolution day.
(3) Until the terms and conditions of employment to which a per-
son transferred under this section was entitled immediately beforethe dissolution day are varied by the Authority after consulting andreaching a collective agreement with the recognised trade union orassociation of employees concerned, they continue to apply to thatperson while in the employment of the Authority.
(4) The previous service of a person transferred under this section
is to be counted as service for the purposes of, but subject to anyexceptions or exclusions in, the following Acts:
(a) the Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2007,
23Pt.4 S.37
Admissibility in
evidence ofdocuments.
Transfer of
employees ofCommission.Pt.4 S.39
Transfer of
Commissioner forTaxi Regulation toAuthority.
24[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(b) the Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001,
(c) the Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act
2003,
(d) the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997,
(e) the Terms of Employment (Information) Acts 1994 and
2001,
(f) the Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005,
(g) the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2007,
(h) the Maternity Protection Acts 1994 and 2004,
(i) the Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006,
(j) the Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005, and
(k) the Carer ’s Leave Act 2001.
(5) ( a) The provisions of section 21(7) and (8) of the Act of 2008
apply in relation to terms and conditions governingsuperannuation benefits granted under schemes madeunder section 21 of the Act of 2008 to persons transferredto the Authority under this section.
(b) The terms and conditions governing superannuation
benefits granted to persons appointed under section 18of the Act of 2003 to be members of the staff of the Com-mission shall not be less favourable than those to whichthe persons in question were entitled immediately beforethe dissolution day arising from a scheme prepared inaccordance with section 24 of the Act of 2003, includingsuch a scheme that is being implemented on an adminis-trative basis, immediately before the dissolution day.
(6) In this section —
“previous service ”means service before the dissolution day with the
Commission, including previous reckonable service within the Civiland Public Service;
“recognised trade union or association of employees ”means a trade
union or association of employees recognised by the Authority forthe purposes of negotiations that are concerned with the terms andconditions of employment and the working conditions of employees;
“terms and conditions of employment ”includes terms and conditions
in respect of tenure of office, remuneration and related matters.
40.—(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), the person who,
immediately before the dissolution day, was serving in the post ofCommissioner for Taxi Regulation under section 14 of the Act of2003, is entitled, while in the employment of the Authority, to termsand conditions of employment no less favourable than those to whichthe person was entitled immediately before the dissolution day.
(2) ( a) The person referred to in subsection (1) and transferred to
the Authority under section 39 , whose term of office[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
expires by effluxion of time, shall be eligible for re-
appointment to serve a second term of appointment inaccordance with section 14(6) of the Act of 2003 (subjectto a limit of serving no more than 10 years in total in thepost of Commissioner for Taxi Regulation).
(b) Any future re-appointment arising under paragraph (a)
shall be on terms and conditions of employment no lessfavourable than those to which the person was entitledduring the first term of appointment.
(3) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , the person referred to in subsec-
tion (1) and transferred to the Authority shall retain the
title of Commissioner for Taxi Regulation on a personalbasis.
(b) The Authority may, in consultation with the Com-
missioner for Taxi Regulation if a person holds that post,decide to change the title and the functions of the post ofCommissioner for Taxi Regulation either in the immedi-ate term or at some future date.
(4) Appointments to the post of Commissioner for Taxi Regu-
lation or any renamed post arising from subsection (3)(b) will be
made by the Authority, and on such terms and conditions, includingremuneration, as the Authority may determine with the consent ofthe Minister and the Minister for Finance.
(5) Notwithstanding the repeal by section 42(3) of sections 14(6),
16 and 17 of the Act of 2003, those sections continue in force andeffect in respect of the person referred to in subsection (1) and trans-
ferred to the Authority under section 39 , subject to references in
those sections to the Commission and the Minister respectively beingreplaced by a reference to the Authority.
(6) ( a) The provisions of section 21(7) and (8) of the Act of 2008
apply in relation to terms and conditions governingsuperannuation benefits granted under schemes madeunder section 21 of the Act of 2008 to the person referredto in subsection (1) .
(b) The terms and conditions governing superannuation
benefits granted to the person referred to in subsection
(1)shall not be less favourable than those to which the
person was entitled immediately before the dissolutionday arising from a scheme prepared in accordance withsection 23 of the Act of 2003, including such a schemethat is being implemented on an administrative basis,immediately before the dissolution day.
41.—(1) With effect from the dissolution day, the Authority shall
carry out the principal function of the Commission and shall seek toachieve the objectives of the Commission as set out in section 9 ofthe Act of 2003 .
(2) The powers, functions and duties of the Commission set out
in the Act of 2003 are with effect from the dissolution day conferredon the Authority.
(3) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) and section 40(3) , the exercise of
the Authority ’s regulatory functions under the Act of
2003 shall be carried out by the person holding the post of
25Pt.4 S.40
Transfer of
functions ofCommission toDublin TransportAuthority.Pt.4 S.41
Amendments to
enactments andrepeals.
Altered references
to Commission andCouncil in Act of2003.
Amendment of Act
of 2000.
26[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
Commissioner for Taxi Regulation or any renamed post
arising from the provisions of section 40(3) .
(b) The Authority may designate another member of staff of
the Authority to exercise its regulatory functions underthe Act of 2003.
PART 5
Amendments to Act of 2003 , Act of 1993 , Act of 2000 ,
Transport (Railway Infrastructure) Act 2001 and Roads Act
2007
42.—(1) The Acts specified in Schedule 1 are amended as indi-
cated in that Schedule.
(2) The Act of 2003 is amended, on the dissolution day, as indi-
cated in Schedule 2 .
(3) Sections 5 to 7, 13 to 21, 23 to 27, 29 and 30 of the Act of 2003
are repealed on the dissolution day.
43.—The Act of 2003 is, on the dissolution day, amended —
(a) by substituting in sections 9 to 12, 22, 32, 34, 36 to 39, 41,
42, 45 to 52, 54 and 55 “Authority ”for“Commission ”,
and
(b) by substituting in sections 11, 34, 41, 42, 48, 54 and 55
“Advisory Committee ”for“Council ”.
44.—(1) The Act of 2000 is amended —
(a) in section 24, by inserting after subsection (5A) (inserted
by section 90 of the Act of 2008) the following:
“(5B) When a regional authority (other than the
regional authorities within the GDA) prepares the draftof the regional planning guidelines it shall include a state-ment in that draft on the actions being taken or proposedto ensure effective integration of transport and land useplanning, including in particular —
(a) a statement explaining how it proposes to
address the matters identified in the report ofthe DTA prepared in accordance with section31FF, and
(b) where it does not propose to address, or pro-
poses to only partially address, any matteridentified in the report of the DTA preparedin accordance with section 31FF, a statementof the reasons for that course of action. ”,
(b) in section 25, by inserting after subsection (3A) (inserted
by section 91 of the Act of 2008) the following:[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
“(3B) When a regional authority (other than the
regional authorities within the GDA) makes regional plan-ning guidelines it shall include in the guidelines a state-ment on the actions being taken or proposed to ensureeffective integration of transport and land use planning,including in particular —
(a) a statement explaining how it proposes to
address the matters identified in the report ofthe DTA prepared in accordance with section31GG, and
(b) where it does not propose to address, or pro-
poses only to partially address, any matteridentified in the report of the DTA preparedin accordance with section 31GG, a statementof the reasons for that course of action. ”,
(c) in section 31A (inserted by section 93 of the Act of 2008),
by substituting for subsection (2)( a) the following:
“(2) ( a) Where a submission received by the Minister
prepared in accordance with —
(i) section 31G(1) contains a statement of the
type referred to in section 31G(1)( b), the
Minister may, for stated reasons, direct theauthorities within the GDA to take suchspecified measures, as he or she mayrequire, to review the draft regional plan-ning guidelines to ensure consistencybetween the draft regional planning guide-lines and the transport strategy of theDTA. The authorities shall comply withany such direction, or
(ii) section 31GG(1) contains a statement of
the type referred to in section31GG(1)( b), the Minister may, for stated
reasons, direct the authority to take suchspecified measures, as he or she mayrequire, to review the draft regional plan-ning guidelines to provide for the effectiveintegration of transport and land use plan-ning in the draft regional planning guide-lines and the authority shall comply withany such direction. ”,
(d) by inserting after section 31F (inserted by section 95 of the
Act of 2008), the following:
“31FF. —(1) Where a regional authority (other than the
regional authorities within the GDA) intends to makeregional planning guidelines in accordance with section 24,or to review existing guidelines under section 26, it shall,as soon as may be, consult with the DTA in order to makethe necessary arrangements for making the guidelines.
(2) The DTA shall assist and co-operate with the
regional authority in making arrangements for the prep-aration of regional planning guidelines and in carrying outthe preparation of the guidelines.
27Pt.5 S.44Pt.5 S.44
Competent
authority of Article6 of Directive2001/14/EC.
Measures to
enhance public busservices —traffic
calming measures.
28[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
(3) In carrying out its functions under subsection (2),
the DTA shall prepare and submit to the regional auth-ority, within 6 weeks of the commencement of consul-tation under subsection (1), a report on the issues which,in its opinion, should be considered by the regional auth-ority in making regional planning guidelines. ”,
(e) by inserting after section 31G (inserted by section 95 of
the Act of 2008) the following:
“31GG. —(1) Where a notice is received by the DTA
under section 24(4) from a regional authority (other thanthe regional authorities within the GDA) the DTA shall,as part of any written submission on the draft regionalplanning guidelines, state whether, in its view, the mattersraised by it in its report under section 31FF are —
(a) satisfactorily addressed in the draft regional
planning guidelines, or
(b) not satisfactorily addressed in the draft regional
planning guidelines.
(2) Where in the context of subsection (1)( b) the DTA
makes a submission, it shall indicate what amendments tothe draft regional planning guidelines it considers shouldbe made to ensure effective integration of transport andland use planning.
(3) The DTA shall send copies of a submission pre-
pared under this section to the Minister and Minister forTransport. ”.
(2) This section comes into operation on such day or days as may
be fixed therefor by order or orders of the Minister and differentdays may be fixed for different amendments effected by this section.
PART 6
Miscellaneous
45.—The Minister is the competent authority for the purpose of
Article 6 of Directive 2001/14/EC of the European Parliament andof the Council of 26 February 2001
1on the allocation of railway infra-
structure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railwayinfrastructure and safety certification.
46.—(1) Section 38 of the Act of 1994 is amended by substituting
for subsection (9) the following:
“(9) In this section —
“bus”means a mechanically propelled vehicle designed for
travel by road having seating accommodation for more than 9persons (including the driver);
“provide ”includes erect or place, maintain and (in the case of
an instrument for giving signals by mechanical means) operate;
1OJ No. L75, 15.03.2001, p.29[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
“public bus service ”means the use of a bus or buses travelling
wholly or mainly on public roads for the carriage of passengersin such a manner that —
(a) the service is provided on a regular and scheduled
basis,
(b) each journey is open to use by members of the public,
(c) carriage is provided for passengers between specified
terminal points or along a specified route or other-wise in accordance with a published timetable, and
(d) a charge or charges are paid in respect of each
passenger;
“traffic calming measures ”means measures which —
(a) enhance the provision of public bus services, including
measures which restrict or control access to all orpart of a public road by mechanically propelledvehicles (whether generally or of a particular class)for the purpose of enhancing public bus services, or
(b) restrict or control the speed or movement of, or which
prevent, restrict or control access to a public road orroads by, mechanically propelled vehicles (whethergenerally or of a particular class) and measureswhich facilitate the safe use of public roads by differ-ent classes of traffic (including pedestrians andcyclists),
and includes for the purposes of the above the provision of
traffic signs, road markings, bollards, posts, poles, chicanes, rum-ble areas, raised, lowered or modified road surfaces, ramps,speed cushions, speed tables or other similar works or devices,islands or central reservations, roundabouts, modified junctions,works to reduce or modify the width of the roadway and land-scaping, planting or other similar works. ”.
(2) Section 179(6) of the Act of 2000 is amended by inserting after
paragraph ( b) the following:
“(bb) consists of works, other than works involving road
widening, to enhance public bus services or improvefacilities for cyclists provided under section 95 (asamended by section 37 of the Road Traffic Act 1994)of the Road Traffic Act 1961 or under section 38 ofthe Road Traffic Act 1994, ”.
(3) Where the Authority considers it more convenient, more
expeditious, more effective or more economic that the functions ofa road authority to provide traffic signs under section 95 (as amendedby section 37 of the Act of 1994) of the Act of 1961 or to providetraffic calming measures under section 38 of the Act of 1994 shouldbe performed by it to enhance public bus services or improve facili-ties for cyclists, it shall following consultation with the relevant roadauthority decide to provide traffic signs or traffic calming measures.
(4) Where the Authority decides to perform functions under sub-
section (3) it has the powers of a road authority to provide traffic
signs under section 95 (as amended by section 37 of the Act of 1994)
29Pt.6 S.46Pt.6 S.46
30[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
of the Act of 1961 or to provide traffic calming measures under
section 38 of the Act of 1994.
(5) Before carrying out works arising from a decision under sub-
section (3) the Authority shall consult with and consider the views of
the relevant road authority.
(6) The Minister may prescribe a class of case in which a decision
by the Authority under subsection (3) does not have effect unless
and until it is approved by him or her.
(7) A road authority shall not restrict or inhibit the operation of
traffic calming measures provided by the Authority under subsection
(3)without the prior consent of the Authority.
(8) In this section —
“Act of 1961 ”means Road Traffic Act 1961;
“Act of 1994 ”means Road Traffic Act 1994;
“road authority ”has the meaning assigned to it by the Act of 1993;
“public bus service ”and “traffic calming measures ”have the mean-
ings assigned to them, respectively, under section 38(9) of the Actof 1994.
(9) This section comes into operation on such day or days as may
be fixed therefor by order or orders of the Minister and differentdays may be fixed or different amendments effected by this sectionor for different provisions.[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
SCHEDULE 1
Amendment of certain Acts
PART 1
Amendment of Act of 2003
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
1. Section 34 The substitution for subsection (8) of the following:
“(8) The Commission, in making regulations
under this section, may set different requirementsand conditions —
(a) in relation to the licensing and operation
of different categories of small publicservice vehicles and their drivers,
(b) for different circumstances, and
(c) for different areas. ”.
2. Section 36 The insertion after subsection (6) of the following:
(as amended
“(7) A reference to an offence mentioned in by section 21
subsection (1) or (5) includes a reference to a of the Road
corresponding offence under the law of a country Traffic Act
or territory outside the State for which an 2006)
applicant for or the holder of a licence has been
convicted in the other jurisdiction. ”.
3. Section 38(3) The insertion after paragraph ( b) of the following:
“(bb) in the case of dispatch operators,
wheelchair accessible taxi licences andsuch other categories of small publicservice vehicle licence to be decided by theCommission, the contact information ofthe holder for the purpose of making andreceiving bookings, together with details inrelation to the holder ’s area and hours of
operation, ”.
4. Section 43 Substitute the following section:
“43.—(1) A person shall not drive or use a
mechanically propelled vehicle capable of beinglicensed as, or licensed as, a small public servicevehicle in a public place (within the meaning ofthe Act of 1961) for the carriage of persons forreward unless the person holds a licence to drivea small public service vehicle.
(2) A person shall not drive or use a
mechanically propelled vehicle capable of beinglicensed as a small public service vehicle in apublic place (within the meaning of the Act of1961) for the carriage of persons for rewardunless there is a small public service vehiclelicence in force in respect of the vehicle.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply equally to a
person who is renting or leasing a mechanicallypropelled vehicle capable of being licensed as, orlicensed as a small public service vehicle, andwho is using that vehicle in a public place for thecarriage of persons for reward.
(4) The holder of a small public service vehicle
licence shall not rent or lease his or her smallpublic service vehicle to another person for thepurpose of the carriage of persons for reward orotherwise agree to allow that other person to
31Section 42(1).Sch. 1
32[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
drive or use his or her small public service vehiclefor that purpose unless he or she is satisfied thatthere continues to be a small public servicevehicle licence in force in respect of the vehicleconcerned for the duration of the term of thelease or agreement.
(5) A person who contravenes subsection (1),
(2), (3) or (4) commits an offence.
(6) Where an authorised person has
reasonable cause to suspect that an offence isbeing or has been committed under this Act orunder regulations made under this Act or undersection 82 of the Act of 1961, an authorisedperson, in the presence of a member of theGarda S íochána in uniform, may seize and detain
any small public service vehicle or mechanicallypropelled vehicle purporting to be a small publicservice vehicle, or internal or external vehiclesignage or identification for so long as isnecessary.
(7) In this section —
“small public service vehicle licence ”means a
licence, in respect of a small public servicevehicle, granted under regulations made undersection 34 or section 82 of the Act of 1961;
“use”includes the stopping, parking of a
mechanically propelled vehicle or the vehiclestanding for hire at an appointed stand. ”.
PART 2
Amendment of Act of 1993
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
1. Section 22(2) The deletion of “(including the preparation of a draft plan
under section 18) ”.
2. Section 61 The insertion after subsection (9) of the following:
(as amended
“(10) A person who contravenes a bye-law by section
made under this section commits an offence. ”. 274 of the
Act of 2000)
3. Section 64(3) Substitute the following paragraph for paragraph ( a):
(inserted by
“(a) the vehicle is registered in the State (other than in section 4 of
the circumstances referred to in paragraph ( c))— the Roads
Act 2007)
(i) the registered owner of the vehicle, and
(ii) the person, whom the road undertaking
concerned can reasonably ascertain, keepsor has possession or charge (includingarising from a leasing arrangement) of thevehicle in the State, ”.
4. Section 77 The repeal of that section.
5. Section 81(1) In paragraph ( c), the insertion of “61(10) ”, after “45(3), ”.
(inserted bysection 11 ofthe RoadsAct 2007)[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
PART 3
Amendment of Transport (Railway Infrastructure) Act 2001
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
1. Section 25 The substitution for subsection (7) of the following:
“(7) Each scheme made under this section
shall make provision for appeals. ”.
2. Section 44 In subsection (2), the insertion after paragraph ( i)o ft h e
(inserted by following:section 49 of
“(j) designate the railway to which the order the Act of
relates as a light railway or as a metro. ”. 2006)
The deletion of subsection (4).
3. Section 45(1) The insertion after paragraph ( c) of the following:
(inserted by
“(d) the form of any vesting order as may be section 49 of
prescribed pursuant to section 82(1) of the the Act of
Housing Act 1966, shall be the prescribed 2006)
form of a vesting order to be used by the
Agency or CI É,”.
PART 4
Amendment of Roads Act 2007
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
1. Section 9(1) The substitution in paragraph ( e)(ii) of “subsection
(3)(a)(vii) ”for“subsection (3)( a)(vi) ”.
2. Section 13( d) The substitution of “42(11) ”for“41(11) ”.
3. Schedule The substitution in column 2, opposite the mention in
column 1 of Section 47, of “substitution ”for“insertion ”.
33Sch. 1Section 42(2).
34[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
SCHEDULE 2
Amendment of Act of 2003
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
1. Section 2(1) The insertion after the definition of “Act of 2002 ”of the
following:
“‘Advisory Committee ’means the Advisory
Committee on Small Public Service Vehicles; ”.
The insertion after the definition of “authorised person ”
of the following:
“‘Authority ’means Dublin Transport Authority,
until the day appointed as the appointed day forthe purposes of section 30 of the Public Transport
Regulation Act 2009 and from that day National
Transport Authority; ”.
The deletion of the definition of “Council ”.
The insertion after the definition of “Commissioner ”of
the following:
“‘dissolution day for the Commission ’means the
day appointed by the Minister under section 31 of
thePublic Transport Regulation Act 2009 for the
dissolution of the Commission for TaxiRegulation; ”.
2. Section 8 Substitute the following section:
“8.—Subject to this Act, the Authority shall be
independent in the exercise of its functions inrelation to the development and maintenance ofa regulatory framework for the control andoperation of small public service vehicles andtheir drivers. ”.
3. Section 22 Substitute the following section:
“22.—(1) Where a member of the staff of the
Authority, or a consultant, adviser or otherperson engaged by the Authority, has a pecuniaryinterest or other beneficial interest in, or materialto, any matter which falls to be considered by theAuthority in relation to its functions under thisAct, he or she —
(a) shall disclose to the Authority the nature
of his or her interest in advance of anyconsideration of the matter,
(b) shall neither influence nor seek to
influence a decision in relation to thematter,
(c) shall take no part in any consideration of
the matter, unless there are compellingreasons requiring him or her to do so,and
(d) shall prepare and furnish to the
Authority a statement in writing of thecompelling reasons.
(2) For the purposes of this section but
without prejudice to the generality of subsection(1), a person shall be regarded as having abeneficial interest if he or she or any member ofhis or her household —[2009.] [ No. 37.] Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
(a) holds a licence,
(b) or any nominee of his or her is a
member of a company or any otherbody which has a beneficial interest in,or material to, a matter referred to inthat subsection,
(c) is in partnership with or is in the
employment of a person who has abeneficial interest in, or material to,such a matter, or
(d) is a party to any arrangement or
agreement (whether or notenforceable) concerning land to whichsuch a matter relates.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person
shall not be regarded as having a beneficialinterest in, or material to, any matter, by reasononly of an interest of his or hers or of anycompany or of any other body or personmentioned in subsection (2) which is so remote orinsignificant that it cannot reasonably beregarded as likely to influence a person inconsidering, discussing or in voting on, anyquestion with respect to the matter, or inperforming any function in relation to thatmatter.
(4) Where a question arises as to whether or
not a course of conduct, if pursued by a person,would be a failure by him or her to comply withthe requirements of subsection (1), the questionshall be determined by the Authority.
(5) Where a disclosure is made to the
Authority, particulars of the disclosure shall berecorded in the minutes of any meetingconcerned.
(6) Where a person referred to in this section
fails to make a disclosure in accordance with thissection, the Authority shall decide theappropriate action (including removal from officeor termination of contract) to be taken. ”.
4. Section 28 Substitute the following section:
“28.—(1) The Authority shall draw up and
adopt a strategy plan reflecting its statutoryfunctions under this Act.
(2) The Authority ’s first strategy plan shall
have regard to any existing strategy statementadopted by the Commission for Taxi Regulationunder this Act or any work done on a newstrategy statement before the dissolution day forthe Commission.
(3) A strategy plan under this section shall —
(a) be adopted within two years of the
establishment of the Authority andevery 5 years thereafter,
(b) take into account the principal function
and objectives set out in section 9 andany Ministerial direction, and
(c) comprise the key objectives, outputs and
related strategies, including use of
35Sch. 2Sch. 2
36[No. 37.] [2009.]Public Transport Regulation Act 2009 .
Item Provision Nature of Amendment
amended
(1) (2) (3)
resources, of the Authority in relationto small public service vehicles andtheir drivers.
(4) The Authority shall present a copy of a
strategy plan to the Minister and to suchcommittees of either or both Houses of theOireachtas as the Minister may, from time totime, direct.
(5) Prior to the adoption of a strategy plan
and its presentation to the Minister, theAuthority shall undertake a public consultationprocess on a draft of the strategy plan.
(6) The Authority shall publish a strategy plan
drawn up and adopted under this section. ”.
5. Section 31 Substitute the following section:
“31.—Subject to section 38 of the Dublin
Transport Authority Act 2008, the Authority maypublish any reports or codes of practice onmatters related to its functions under this Act. ”.
6. Section 50(2) Substitute the following paragraph for paragraph ( a):
“(a) meeting the expenses properly incurred by
the Authority in the discharge of itsfunctions under this Act, the DublinTransport Authority Act 2008 and thePublic Transport Regulation Act 2009 ,
and”.
7. Section 54(1) Substitute the following subsection:
“54.—(1) The name of the Advisory Council
to the Commission for Taxi Regulation (AnChomhairle don Choimisi ún um Rial áil
Tacsaithe) is changed to, in the English language,the Advisory Committee on Small Public ServiceVehicles or, in the Irish language, An CoisteComhairleach um Beagfheithicl íSeirbh íse Poibl í,
and in this Act is referred to as the ‘Advisory
Committee ’. The Advisory Committee continues
in being to perform the functions assigned to itunder this Part. ”.
8. Section 55 In subsection (2), substitute the following paragraphs for
paragraph ( a)(iii) and (iv):
“(iii) the preparation and review of the strategy
plan provided for in section 28,
(iv) the draft transport strategy and draft
integrated implementation plan undersections 12 and 13 of the Dublin TransportAuthority Act 2008 in relation to issuesrelevant to small public service vehiclesand their drivers, and
(v) any other matters related to the functions of
the Authority or which the Authoritysubmits to the Advisory Committee foradvice, other than matters related todecisions of the Authority in individualcases, ”.
In subsection (7), substitute “section 38 of the Dublin
Transport Authority Act 2008 ”for“section 21 ”.