————————
Number 22of2009
————————
HOUSING (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL
Section
1. Short title, collective citation, construction and com-
mencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Regulations.4. Ministerial directions.5. Guidelines.6. Limitation on Ministerial power.7. Repeals.8. Consequential amendments.9. Expenses.
PART 2
FUNCTIONS OF HOUSING AUTHORITIES
Chapter 1
Housing Services
10. Provision of housing services.
11. Provision of ancillary services.12. Funding for housing services.13. Housing authority resources.
12[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Chapter 2
Housing Services Plan
14. Obligation to make housing services plan.
15. Content of housing services plan.16. Preparation of draft plan and making of plan.17. Variation of housing services plan.18. Housing action programme.
Chapter 3
Social Housing Support
19. Provision of social housing support.
20. Social housing assessment.21. Summary of social housing assessments.22. Allocation of dwellings.
Chapter 4
Rental Accommodation Arrangements
23. Interpretation ( Chapter 4 ).
24. Rental accommodation availability agreement.25. Chapter 4 tenancy agreement.
26. Expenses incurred by housing authority.27. Non-application of certain provisions to disposals for pur-
poses of this Chapter.
Chapter 5
Management and Control Functions
28. Management and control functions.
29. Tenancy agreements.30. Delegation of management and control functions.31. Rent schemes and charges.32. Information requirements.33. Moneys owing to housing authority.34. Arrangements with households for payment of moneys due
and owing to housing authority.
35. Anti-social behaviour strategy.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Chapter 6
Homelessness Action Plans
36. Interpretation ( Chapter 6 ).
37. Homelessness action plan.38. Homelessness consultative forum.39. Management group.40. Preparation of draft plan and making of plan.41. Ministerial directions.42. Power of Minister to prescribe body as specified body.
PART 3
INCREMENTAL PURCHASE ARRANGEMENTS
43. Interpretation ( Part 3 ).
44. Application of Part 3 to certain dwellings.
45. Sale of dwelling by incremental purchase arrangement.
46. Charging order.47. Suspension of reduction of charged share.48. Control on resale of dwelling sold under an incremental pur-
chase arrangement.
49. Regulations ( Part 3 ).
PART 4
TENANT PURCHASE OF APARTMENTS
50. Interpretation ( Part 4 ).
51. Consideration of designation of apartment complex.52. Preparation of draft proposal to designate apartment
complex.
53. Proposal to designate apartment complex.54. Tenant plebiscite.55. Designation of apartment complex.56. Initial selling period.57. Establishment and objects of management company.
58. Annual meetings and reports of management company.59. Transfer of ownership of designated apartment complex to
management company.
34[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
60. Lease of apartment to housing authority.
61. Consequences of designation lapsing under section 55 .
62. Costs incurred by management company.63. Management, control and maintenance of designated apart-
ment complex.
64. Sale by housing authority of apartments to tenants.65. Management company provisions.66. Automatic transfer of membership of management company
on sale of apartment.
67. Apartment complex service charge.68. Sinking fund.69. Management company annual charges.70. Apartment complex support fund.71. Dispute between housing authority and management com-
pany arising under section 70(10) .
72. Accounts of management company.73. Property services agreement.74. Charging order.75. Suspension of reduction of charged share.76. Control on resale of apartment subject to a charging order.77. Regulations ( Part 4 ).
PART 5
AFFORDABLE DWELLING PURCHASE ARRANGEMENTS
78. Interpretation ( Part 5 ).
79. Provision of dwellings.80. Direct sales agreement.81. Open market dwelling.82. Application of Part 5 .
83. Affordable dwelling purchase arrangements.84. Assessment of eligibility of household for affordable dwelling
purchase arrangement.
85. Scheme of priority for affordable dwelling purchase
arrangements.
86. Charging order.87. Payments by purchaser during charged period.
88. Registration of charging orders and agreements with finan-
cial institutions.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
89. Repayment on expiration of charged period.
90. Control on resale of dwelling purchased under affordable
dwelling purchase arrangement.
91. Recovery of amounts due to housing authority.92. Valuation of dwelling for certain purposes.93. Discharge of charging order.94. Affordable Dwellings Fund.
95. Regulations ( Part 5 ).
96. Transitional arrangements and savings provisions.
PART 6
PROVISIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN GRANTS
97. Grants in respect of provision of sites under section 57 of
Principal Act.
98. Control on resale of certain sites or dwellings thereon.99. Repayment of adaptation grant.
PART 7
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES ACT
2004
100. Amendments to Residential Tenancies Act 2004.
SCHEDULE 1
Repeals
SCHEDULE 2
Consequential Amendments
PART 1
Amendments to Housing Act 1966
PART 2
Amendments to Housing Finance Agency Act 1981
PART 3
Amendments to Housing Act 1988
PART 4
Amendments to Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992
PART 5
Amendments to Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1997
56[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
PART 6
Amendments to Housing (Traveller Accommodation) Act 1998
PART 7
Amendments to Planning and Development Act 2000
PART 8
Amendment to Civil Registration Act 2004
PART 9
Amendment to Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005
SCHEDULE 3
Terms and Conditions of Tenancy Agreement
SCHEDULE 4
Information to be Included in Property Services Agreement
————————
Acts Referred to
Arbitration Acts 1954 to 1998
Central Bank Act 1971 1971, No. 24Civil Registration Act 2004 2004, No. 3Companies ActsConveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911Family Home Protection Act 1976 1976, No. 27Garda S íochána Act 2005 2005, No. 20
Health Acts 1947 to 2008Housing Finance Agency Act 1981 1981, No. 37Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1979 1979, No. 27Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992 1992, No. 18Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1997 1997, No. 21Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2002 2002, No. 9Housing (Traveller Accommodation) Act 1998 1998, No. 33Housing Act 1966 1966, No. 21Housing Act 1988 1988, No. 28Housing Acts 1966 to 2004Land Law (Ireland) Act 1881 1881, c. 49Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Planning and Development Act 2000 2000, No. 30Registration of Title Act 1964 1964, No. 16Residential Tenancies Act 2004 2004, No. 27Social Welfare ActsSocial Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 2005, No. 26State Authorities (Public Private Partnership Arrange-
ments) Act 2002 2002, No. 1
Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Vocational Education Act 1930 1930, No. 29————————
Number 22of2009
————————
HOUSING (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO MAKE FURTHER PROVISION FOR THE FUNC-
TIONS OF HOUSING AUTHORITIES; TO PROVIDE FORTHE MAKING OF HOUSING SERVICES PLANS; TOPROVIDE FOR THE CARRYING OUT OF SOCIALHOUSING ASSESSMENTS FOR THE PURPOSES OFSOCIAL HOUSING SUPPORT AND THE ALLOCATIONOF DWELLINGS; TO PROVIDE FOR RENTAL ACCOM-MODATION ARRANGEMENTS; TO PROVIDE FOR THEMANAGEMENT AND CONTROL FUNCTIONS OF HOUS-ING AUTHORITIES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE MAKINGOF HOMELESSNESS ACTION PLANS; TO PROVIDE FORTHE MAKING OF AN ANTI-SOCIAL BEHAVIOURSTRATEGY; TO MAKE FURTHER PROVISION FORTENANT PURCHASE OF DWELLINGS UNDERINCREMENTAL PURCHASE ARRANGEMENTS; TOPROVIDE FOR THE TENANT PURCHASE OF APART-MENTS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE SALE OF CERTAINDWELLINGS UNDER AFFORDABLE DWELLING PUR-CHASE ARRANGEMENTS; TO MAKE FURTHER PRO-VISION RELATING TO STANDARDS FOR RENTEDHOUSES AND TO PROVIDE FOR THE GIVING OFIMPROVEMENT NOTICES AND PROHIBITIONNOTICES TO LANDLORDS; FOR THOSE AND OTHERPURPOSES TO AMEND AND EXTEND THE HOUSINGACTS 1966 TO 2004, TO AMEND THE HOUSING FIN-ANCE AGENCY ACT 1981, THE PLANNING ANDDEVELOPMENT ACT 2000, THE CIVIL REGISTRATIONACT 2004, THE RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES ACT 2004AND THE SOCIAL WELFARE CONSOLIDATION ACT2005 AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[15th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
7Short title,
collective citation,construction andcommencement.
Interpretation.
8[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
PART 1
PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009.
(2) The Housing Acts 1966 to 2004 and this Act (other than
section 100 ) may be cited together as the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009
and shall be construed together as one Act.
(3) Section 100 and, in so far as it relates to that section, this
section shall be construed as one with the Residential Tenancies Acts2004 and 2009 and shall be included in the collective citation “Resid-
ential Tenancies Acts 2004 and 2009 ”.
(4) This Act (other than section 100 ) comes into operation on
such day or days as the Minister may appoint by order or orderseither generally or with reference to any particular purpose or pro-vision and different days may be so appointed for different purposesor different provisions, including the application of section 7 or8to
different enactments specified in Schedule 1 orSchedule 2 and to
different provisions of those enactments.
2.—(1) In this Act —
“Act of 1988 ”means the Housing Act 1988;
“Act of 1992 ”means the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
1992;
“Act of 1997 ”means the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
1997;
“Act of 2002 ”means the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2002;
“affordable housing ”means affordable dwellings purchased under
affordable dwelling purchase arrangements under Part 5 or afford-
able housing provided under Part V of the Planning and Develop-ment Act 2000 or Part 2 of the Act of 2002, as the case may be;
“allocation scheme ”has the meaning given to it by section 22 ;
“anti-social behaviour ”has the same meaning as in section 1 of the
Act of 1997;
“approved body ”means a body standing approved of for the pur-
poses of section 6 of the Act of 1992;
“caravan ”has the same meaning as in section 13 of the Act of 1988;
“Chapter 4 tenancy agreement ”has the meaning given to it by section
25and references to “Chapter 4 tenancy ”shall be construed
accordingly;
“development plan ”has the same meaning as in section 2 of the
Planning and Development Act 2000;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
“dwelling ”includes any building or part of a building occupied or
intended for occupation as a normal place of residence and includesany out-office, yard, garden or other land appurtenant thereto orusually enjoyed therewith and includes a house, flat, apartment, mai-sonette or hostel;
“estate management ”has the same meaning as in section 1 of the
Act of 1997;
“executive function ”has the same meaning as in section 2 of the
Local Government Act 2001;
“homelessness action plan ”has the meaning given to it by section 37 ;
“homelessness consultative forum ”has the meaning given to it by
section 38 ;
“homeless person ”means a person who is regarded by a housing
authority as being homeless within the meaning of section 2 of theAct of 1988 and “homeless ”and “homeless household ”shall be con-
strued accordingly;
“joint homelessness consultative forum ”shall be read in accordance
with section 38 ;
“household ”means, subject to sections 20 and 84, a person who lives
alone or 2 or more persons who live together;
“housing action programme ”has the meaning given to it by section
18;
“housing authority ”has the same meaning as in section 23 of the
Act of 1992;
“housing services ”shall be read in accordance with section 10 ;
“housing services plan ”has the meaning given to it by section 14 ;
“housing strategy ”has the same meaning as in section 93 of the Plan-
ning and Development Act 2000;
“housing support ”shall be read in accordance with section 10(a) ;
“local authority ”means a local authority for the purposes of the
Local Government Act 2001;
“manager ”has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Local
Government Act 2001;
“market rent ”has the same meaning as in section 24 of the Residen-
tial Tenancies Act 2004;
“material improvements ”means improvements made to —
(a) a dwelling sold under an incremental purchase arrange-
ment under Part 3 ,o r
(b) subject to section 78(3) , a dwelling sold under an afford-
able dwelling purchase arrangement under Part 5 ,
whether for the purposes of extending, enlarging, repairing or con-
verting the dwelling, but does not include decoration, or any
9Pt.1 S.2Pt.1 S.2
Regulations.
10[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
improvements carried out on the land including the construction of
the dwelling;
“Minister ”means the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and
Local Government;
“prescribed ”means prescribed by regulations made by the Minister
under this Act;
“Principal Act ”means the Housing Act 1966;
“public private partnership arrangement ”has the same meaning as
in section 3 of the State Authorities (Public Private PartnershipArrangements) Act 2002;
“refurbishment ”in relation to a dwelling or other building, includes
the enlargement, improvement, adaptation or reconstruction of suchdwelling or other building;
“rental accommodation availability agreement ”has the meaning
given to it by section 24 ;
“rent scheme ”has the meaning given to it by section 31 ;
“reserved function ”has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Local
Government Act 2001;
“social housing assessment ”has the meaning given to it by section 20 ;
“social housing support ”shall be read in accordance with section 19 .
(2) In this Act references to “borough council ”,“county council ”
and “town council ”shall be read in accordance with the Local
Government Act 2001.
3.—(1) The Minister may make regulations prescribing any
matter referred to in this Act as prescribed or to be prescribed or tobe the subject of regulations or for the purpose of enabling any ofits provisions to have full effect.
(2) Regulations made under this Act may —
(a) contain such incidental, supplementary, consequential or
transitional provisions as appear to the Minister to benecessary for the purposes of the regulations, and
(b) may be expressed to apply either generally or to specified
housing authorities or areas or to housing authorities,areas, apartment complexes (within the meaning ofsection 50 ), dwellings, tenancies, loans, mortgages, per-
sons, households, works or any other matter of a specifiedclass or classes, denoted by reference to such matters towhich the provision or provisions of this Act under whichthe regulations are made relate, as the Minister considersappropriate, and different provisions of such regulationsmay be expressed to apply in relation to different housingauthorities or areas or different classes of housing auth-orities, areas, apartment complexes (within the meaningofsection 50 ), dwellings, tenancies, loans, mortgages, per-
sons, households, works or other matters.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(3) Every regulation under this Act shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it has been madeand, if a resolution annulling the regulation is passed by either suchHouse within the next 21 days on which that House has sat after theregulation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulled accord-ingly, but without prejudice to the validity of anything previouslydone thereunder.
4.—(1) The Minister may, from time to time, as he or she con-
siders appropriate, give general policy directions in writing to a hous-ing authority in relation to the performance by the housing authorityof any of its functions under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 and the
housing authority shall comply with any such directions.
(2) The Minister may, by direction in writing, revoke or amend a
direction under subsection (1) , including a direction under this
subsection.
(3) Whenever the Minister gives a direction under this section, he
or she shall publish the direction or cause it to be published in themanner he or she considers appropriate.
(4) A housing authority shall make available for inspection by
members of the public, without charge, on the Internet and at itsoffices and such other places as it considers appropriate, during nor-mal working hours, a copy of any direction given to it under thissection.
5.—(1) The Minister may, from time to time, as he or she con-
siders appropriate, issue to housing authorities such guidelines inrelation to the performance of their functions under the Housing
Acts 1966 to 2009 as he or she considers appropriate and housing
authorities shall have regard to such guidelines in the performanceof those functions.
(2) The Minister shall publish or cause to be published, in the
manner he or she considers appropriate, any guidelines issued underthis section.
(3) A housing authority shall make available for inspection by
members of the public, without charge, on the Internet and at itsoffices and such other places as it considers appropriate, during nor-mal working hours, a copy of any guidelines issued to it under thissection.
6.—Without prejudice to section 12 ,sections 4 and 5shall not be
construed as enabling the Minister to exercise any power or controlin relation to any particular case with which a housing authority isor may be concerned.
7.—The Acts specified in column (3) ofSchedule 1 are repealed
to the extent specified in column (4) of that Schedule.
8.—The Acts specified in Schedule 2 are amended as indicated in
that Schedule.
11Pt.1 S.3
Ministerial
directions.
Guidelines.
Limitation on
Ministerial power.
Repeals.
Consequential
amendments.Pt.1
Expenses.
Provision of
housing services.
12[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
9.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.
PART 2
FUNCTIONS OF HOUSING AUTHORITIES
Chapter 1
Housing Services
10.—In performing its functions under the Housing Acts 1966 to
2009 , a housing authority may provide housing services, including,
but not necessarily limited to, all or any of the following —
(a) housing support provided to households for the purposes
of meeting their accommodation needs, including:
(i) social housing support;
(ii) affordable housing;
(iii) the granting of shared ownership leases under section
3 of the Act of 1992;
(iv) the sale, or consent to the sale, of dwellings under
section 90 of the Principal Act;
(v) subsidies payable under section 4 of the Act of 1992
or section 7 of the Act of 2002;
(vi) loans made under section 11 of the Act of 1992 or
section 25(1) of the Housing (TravellerAccommodation) Act 1998;
(vii) grants for works of improvement or adaptation to
houses under section 5 of the Act of 1992;
(viii) grants and other assistance for the provision of new
houses or improvement works to houses undersection 6 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)Act 1979;
(ix) services provided to homeless persons under section
10 of the Act of 1988;
(x) the provision of sites under section 57 of the Princi-
pal Act,
(b) assistance, other than financial assistance or housing sup-
port, provided —
(i) in accordance with a homelessness action plan to
households that were formerly homeless before theiroccupation of their current accommodation and, inthe opinion of the housing authority, such assistanceis necessary for the purposes of supporting thosehouseholds in remaining in occupation of thataccommodation, or[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(ii) to tenants of dwellings to which section 31(1) applies,
(c) the management, maintenance and refurbishment under
section 28 of any dwelling, building or land of which the
housing authority is the owner or which is under its man-agement and control, and
(d) the reconstruction or improvement under section 12 of the
Act of 1988 of certain houses provided by housingauthorities.
11.—(1) In this section “ancillary services ”include roads, shops,
facilities for the benefit of the community (including health andleisure facilities), playgrounds, places of recreation, parks, allot-ments, open spaces, sites for places of worship, factories, schools,offices and other buildings or land and other such works or services,as will, in the opinion of a housing authority, serve a beneficial pur-pose either in connection with the requirements of the householdsfor which the dwellings concerned are provided or in connection withthe requirements of other households.
(2) In providing housing services and in connection with dwellings
provided, to be provided or which, in the opinion of the housingauthority will in the future require to be provided, a housing auth-ority may provide and, if it considers appropriate, maintain in goodorder and repair, the ancillary services.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) —
(a) reference to the provision of dwellings includes dwellings
provided, or maintained, on behalf of a housing authoritypursuant to arrangements with an approved body, orpublic private partnership arrangements, and
(b) reference to the provision and maintenance of ancillary
services includes ancillary services provided pursuant toarrangements with an approved body, or public privatepartnership arrangements.
12.—(1) The Minister may, for the purposes of the provision of
housing services, with the consent of the Minister for Finance, payto a housing authority, out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas, agrant or subsidy in respect of all or any one or more of the following:
(a) the provision of dwellings or sites by the authority;
(b) the refurbishment of dwellings provided by the authority;
(c) the provision of caravans, or the provision, improvement
or management by the authority of sites for caravansreferred to in section 13 of the Act of 1988 for personsto whom that section applies;
(d) the acquisition of land for the provision of dwellings or
sites;
(e) the provision of ancillary services in connection with the
provision or improvement of dwellings or sites;
13Pt.2 S.10
Provision of
ancillary services.
Funding for housing
services.Pt.2 S.12
14[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(f) subject to such regulations as may be made under this
section, the provision of assistance to an approved bodyunder section 6 of the Act of 1992;
(g) such measures as may be taken by the housing authority
pursuant to its housing services plan for the purposes ofimproving its housing services;
(h) such measures as may be taken by the housing authority
pursuant to its homelessness action plan relating to theprovision of assistance under section 10(b)(i) .
(2) A grant or subsidy shall not be paid under this section in
respect of a dwelling, site or works unless the relevant dwelling, siteor works comply on completion with such conditions, if any, as may,from time to time, be determined by the Minister for the purposesof this section in relation to standards of construction and works andthe provision of water, sewerage and other services in dwellings orto sites.
(3) A subsidy under subsection (1) in respect of loan charges
incurred in the provision of any of the housing services referred toin that subsection may be made either to the housing authority con-cerned or, on its behalf, to the person who made the relevant loanin respect of which the loan charges were incurred.
(4) The Minister may make regulations in relation to the payment
of a grant or subsidy under subsection (1)(f) providing for all or any
one or more of the following:
(a) the class or classes of accommodation in respect of which
the grant or subsidy may be paid and the class or classesof households for whom such accommodation isprovided;
(b) the amount of the grant or subsidy;
(c) requirements in relation to —
(i) the assistance in respect of which the grant or subsidy
may be paid,
(ii) the payment of the grant or subsidy,
(iii) the financial and other circumstances of households
occupying accommodation in respect of which thegrant or subsidy may be paid,
(iv) the occupation and maintenance of accommodation in
respect of which the grant or subsidy may be paid,
(v) the floor area of accommodation in respect of which
the grant or subsidy may be paid, measured in suchmanner as may, from time to time, be determined bythe Minister,
(vi) standards of construction, works and repair and the
availability in accommodation, in respect of whichthe grant or subsidy may be paid, of water, sewerageand other services, and[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(vii) the payment under any enactment (including this Act)
of any other grant, subsidy or assistance in respectof the accommodation concerned.
13.—Any moneys accruing to a housing authority from —
(a) the sale of a dwelling owned by the authority, including a
sale under section 90 of the Principal Act or Part 3 or4,
(b) the resale of a dwelling under section 48 or76,
(c) an approved body in respect of the resale of a dwelling
referred to in paragraph (b) ,
(d) payments in respect of any amounts outstanding under
section 47 or75, as the case may be,
(e) the resale of a dwelling under section 9 of the Act of 2002,
(f) the purchase of the interest of the housing authority or the
sale of a dwelling, as the case may be, under section 10of the Act of 2002,
(g) the resale of certain sites, or dwellings on such sites, under
section 98 ,o r
(h) the repayment of a grant to which section 99 applies,
shall be accounted for by the housing authority in a separate account
and, subject to the prior approval of the Minister, may be used forthe provision of housing or for the refurbishment or maintenance ofexisting housing, or any other related purposes.
Chapter 2
Housing Services Plan
14.—(1) Each housing authority shall make a plan (in this Act
referred to as a “housing services plan ”) setting out the objectives
which the housing authority considers to be reasonable and neces-sary for the provision of housing services having regard to therequirements of the housing strategy or strategies relating to housingsupports for its administrative area.
(2) A housing services plan shall be in writing and shall specify
how the housing authority proposes to provide housing services.
(3) Subject to subsection (5) , a housing authority shall adopt a
housing services plan not later than 6 months after the date on whichthe current development plan is made.
(4) A housing services plan shall relate to the remaining period
of the housing authority ’s current development plan.
(5) ( a) The Minister may direct a housing authority or housing
authorities to make a housing services plan relating to theremaining period of the development plan in operation,on the coming into operation of this section, in respect ofthe administrative area concerned and this Chapter shallapply to the preparation and making of such a plan.
15Pt.2 S.12
Housing authority
resources.
Obligation to make
housing servicesplan.Pt.2 S.14
Content of housing
services plan.
16[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) A housing authority shall comply with any direction given
to it under paragraph (a) .
(6) The preparation, making, adoption or variation of a housing
services plan, or draft plan, as the case may be, is a reserved function.
15.—(1) In making a housing services plan, a housing authority
shall, in particular, have regard to the following:
(a) the development plan or plans for its administrative area;
(b) any summary or summaries of social housing assessments
prepared under section 21 ;
(c) the demand for affordable housing in its administrative
area;
(d) the accommodation programme or programmes adopted
for its administrative area in accordance with section 7 ofthe Housing (Traveller Accommodation) Act 1998;
(e) the homelessness action plan adopted in accordance with
Chapter 6 in respect of its administrative area;
(f) the need to ensure that housing services are delivered in a
manner which promotes sustainable communities, includ-ing but not necessarily limited to the need to —
(i) counteract undue segregation in housing between per-
sons of different social backgrounds, and
(ii) ensure that a mixture of dwelling types and sizes and
of classes of tenure is provided to reasonably matchthe different types of housing support required in itsadministrative area;
(g) its anti-social behaviour strategy (if any) under section 35 ;
(h) any directions given by the Minister under subsection (2) ;
(i) the matters specified in section 69 of the Local Govern-
ment Act 2001 to which local authorities are required tohave regard in performing their functions.
(2) ( a) The Minister may direct a housing authority to include in
its housing services plan such information as he or sheconsiders necessary, including, but not necessarily limitedto, information on, and priorities relating to, each of thefollowing:
(i) the provision of appropriate housing supports;
(ii) proposed measures to ensure that housing supports
are delivered in a manner which promotes sus-tainable communities;
(iii) the quality, standards and condition of housing owned
by the housing authority, and priorities for refur-bishment;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(iv) plans for the regeneration of the administrative area
concerned or any part of it;
(v) the policies of the housing authority relating to the
management and maintenance of dwellings or sitesowned or controlled by it.
(b) A housing authority shall comply with any direction given
to it under paragraph (a) .
(3) A housing services plan shall include the summary or summar-
ies, prepared under section 21 , of the social housing assessments
carried out in respect of the administrative area concerned.
16.—(1) A housing authority shall prepare a draft of the housing
services plan and shall send a copy of the draft housing servicesplan to —
(a) the Minister,
(b) every local authority whose administrative area adjoins, or
is contained in, the administrative area of the authoritypreparing the draft plan,
(c) the Health Service Executive,
(d) approved bodies engaged in the provision of accom-
modation or shelter in the administrative area concerned,
(e) the homelessness consultative forum in its administrative
area, or joint homelessness consultative forum, as thecase may be,
(f) any local traveller accommodation consultative committee
in the administrative area concerned appointed undersection 21 of the Housing (Traveller Accommodation)Act 1998, and
(g) such local community bodies in the administrative area
concerned and any other person, as the housing authorityconsiders appropriate.
(2) Written submissions or observations with respect to the draft
housing services plan may be made by the persons specified in sub-
section (1) to the housing authority within 8 weeks from the date on
which the draft plan is sent under subsection (1) .
(3) Where the Minister considers that any draft housing services
plan fails to adequately take account of any of the matters specifiedinsection 15(1) , the Minister may, within the period specified in sub-
section (2) , for stated reasons, direct the housing authority concerned
to take specified measures to ensure that the housing services plan,when made, takes adequate account of those matters and the housingauthority shall comply with any such direction.
(4) Not later than 4 weeks after the end of the period specified in
subsection (2) , the manager shall prepare and submit to the housing
authority a report on —
(a) any submissions or observations made under subsection
(2),
17Pt.2 S.15
Preparation of draft
plan and making ofplan.Pt.2 S.16
Variation of
housing servicesplan.
Housing action
programme.
18[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) the directions (if any) of the Minister under subsection (3)
and the stated reasons for those directions, and
(c) any aspect of the draft housing services plan (other than
aspects of the draft plan the subject of any ministerialdirection under subsection (3) ) that, in his or her opinion,
fails to adequately take account of any of the mattersspecified in section 15(1) .
(5) The housing authority shall, having taken account of the direc-
tions of the Minister (if any) under subsection (3) and the manager ’s
report under subsection (4) , adopt the housing services plan, with
or without modification, within 6 weeks after the submission of themanager ’s report.
(6) The housing authority shall —
(a) give a copy of the housing services plan to the Minister as
soon as practicable after it is adopted,
(b) make the housing services plan available for inspection on
request by any person, without charge, at its offices andsuch other places as it considers appropriate, during nor-mal office hours,
(c) on request by any person, provide a copy of the housing
services plan at a price not exceeding the reasonable costof reproduction, and
(d) publish and maintain a copy of the housing services plan
on the Internet for the period of the plan.
17.—(1) Where the manager considers that there has been a
change in any of the matters specified in section 15(1) that signifi-
cantly affects the housing services plan, including any adjustment ofa housing strategy pursuant to section 95(3) of the Planning andDevelopment Act 2000, the manager shall submit a report on thematter to the members of the housing authority and, where the man-ager considers it necessary and appropriate, he or she may recom-mend that the housing services plan be varied accordingly and thehousing authority may, having taken account of any such recom-mendations, as it considers appropriate, decide to vary the plan orpart or parts thereof accordingly.
(2) Where the Minister considers that there has been a change in
circumstances that significantly affects all or any part or parts of oneor more than one housing services plan, he or she may give a direc-tion requiring the housing authority or authorities concerned to varythe plan or plans or part or parts thereof accordingly and the housingauthority or authorities, as the case may be, shall comply with anysuch direction.
(3) Section 16 applies to the variation of a plan as it applies to the
preparation and adoption of a plan, with any necessary modi-fications.
18.—(1) The manager shall, from time to time, in such form and
for such period as the Minister may direct, prepare a programme (inthis Act referred to as a “housing action programme ”) for implemen-
tation of the housing services plan.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(2) A housing action programme shall —
(a) take account of the financial resources available for the
period to which the programme relates, and
(b) include such matters as the Minister may specify in a direc-
tion given under subsection (1) , including (except in the
case of the first housing action programme) a review ofprogress made in the implementation of the housingservices plan during the period of the previous housingaction programme.
(3) The manager shall provide a copy of the housing action prog-
ramme to the Minister, the members of the housing authority andthe members of any borough council or town council situated in theadministrative area of the housing authority.
Chapter 3
Social Housing Support
19.—(1) A housing authority may, in accordance with the Hous-
ing Acts 1966 to 2009 and regulations made thereunder, provide,
facilitate or manage the provision of social housing support.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , social
housing support may include all or any of the following:
(a) dwellings provided by a housing authority under the Hous-
ing Acts 1966 to 2009 or provided under Part V of the
Planning and Development Act 2000, other than afford-able housing;
(b) dwellings provided by an approved body;
(c) the sale of a dwelling under Part 3 ;
(d) entering into and maintaining rental accommodation avail-
ability agreements;
(e) the provision of sites for caravans referred to in section 13
of the Act of 1988 and any accommodation provided totravellers under the Housing (Traveller Accommodation)Act 1998;
(f) the provision of sites for building purposes under section
57 of the Principal Act.
(3) A housing authority may, in accordance with the Housing Acts
1966 to 2009 and regulations made thereunder, for the purposes of
providing social housing support to households, whether provided ona permanent or temporary basis —
(a) purchase, build, lease or otherwise acquire dwellings or
sites,
(b) convert buildings, and
(c) refurbish dwellings.
19Pt.2 S.18
Provision of social
housing support.Pt.2 S.19
Social housing
assessment.
20[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(4) In performing its functions under subsections (2) and (3)a
housing authority shall have regard to its housing services plan andthe need to —
(a) counteract undue segregation in housing between persons
of different social backgrounds, and
(b) ensure that a mixture of dwelling types and sizes and of
classes of tenure is provided to reasonably match therequirements of households.
(5) A housing authority may, with the approval of the Minister,
enter into a public private partnership arrangement for the perform-ance of its functions under subsection (1) .
(6) The power of a housing authority to provide dwellings and
sites for building purposes under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 shall,
in the case of a county council, be deemed to include, and always tohave included, a power to provide dwellings or sites, as the case maybe, in a town listed in Part 2 of Schedule 6 of the Local GovernmentAct 2001, as if, for the purpose of such provision, the town formedpart of the administrative area of the council.
20.—(1) A reference in this section to a household shall be read
as including a reference to 2 or more persons who, in the opinion ofthe housing authority concerned, have a reasonable requirement tolive together.
(2) Where a household applies for social housing support, the
housing authority concerned shall, subject to and in accordance withregulations made for the purposes of this section, carry out an assess-ment (in this Act referred to as a “social housing assessment ”) of the
household ’s eligibility, and need for, social housing support for the
purposes of determining —
(a) whether the household is qualified for such support, and
(b) the most appropriate form of any such support.
(3) A housing authority may carry out a social housing assessment
where a household has been in receipt of a supplement under section198(3) of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005 towards theamount of rent payable by the household in respect of the house-hold ’s residence for such period as may be prescribed.
(4) The Minister may make regulations providing for the means
by which the eligibility of households for social housing support shallbe determined including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(a) the maximum income threshold based on a household
comprising one person;
(b) the methodology according to which the threshold
referred to in paragraph (a) shall be adjusted for house-
holds comprising more than one person;
(c) the manner in which a housing authority shall set the
income threshold, having regard to the market rent inrespect of, and the average purchase prices for, dwellingsin its administrative area, which in any case shall not be[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
more than the maximum income threshold referred to in
paragraph (a) ;
(d) the procedures to be applied by a housing authority for
the purposes of determining a household ’s eligibility by
reference to income;
(e) the availability to the household of alternative accom-
modation that would meet its housing need;
(f) social housing support previously provided by any housing
authority to the household which may be taken accountof by a housing authority in making a determination asto the most appropriate form of social housing supportfor that household;
(g) the period for which a household is required to be in
receipt of the supplement referred to in subsection (3) .
(5) A household shall not be eligible for social housing support
where —
(a) at any time during the 3 years immediately before the
carrying out of the social housing assessment, the house-hold or a member of the household was in arrears of rentfor an accumulated period of 12 weeks or more in respectof any dwelling or site let to them by any housing auth-ority under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 or provided
under Part V of the Planning and Development Act2000, and
(b) the housing authority has not entered into an arrangement
under section 34 with the household or the member con-
cerned for the payment of the moneys due and owing tothe housing authority in respect of those arrears.
(6) The Minister may make regulations providing for the matters
by reference to which a household ’s need for social housing support
and the form of such support shall be determined including, but notnecessarily limited to, the following:
(a) the description and classification of household need;
(b) the description of specific accommodation requirements
according to different categories of household need;
(c) the description of accommodation need based on the com-
position of the household.
(7) The Minister may make regulations in relation to the carrying
out of social housing assessments, including, but not necessarily lim-ited to, the following:
(a) the form and manner in which a social housing assessment
shall be carried out;
(b) the period within which an application for social housing
support shall be dealt with by a housing authority;
(c) notification by the housing authority of the making of a
decision in respect of an application for social housingsupport;
21Pt.2 S.20Pt.2 S.20
Summary of social
housingassessments.
Allocation of
dwellings.
22[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(d) the frequency of reviewing and updating assessments.
(8) In carrying out a social housing assessment under this section,
a housing authority may disregard the accommodation the householdis occupying where the authority has reason to believe that thehousehold, or any member of it, has deliberately or without goodand sufficient reason done or failed to do anything (other than anaction or omission in good faith) in consequence of which the accom-modation the household is so occupying is less suitable for itsadequate housing than other accommodation which it would havebeen, or would be, reasonable for the household to occupy.
(9) A household in receipt of social housing support referred to
insection 19(2)(b) , before the coming into operation of this section,
is deemed to have been assessed and qualified for such social housingsupport under this section.
(10) A housing authority shall not be required to carry out a social
housing assessment for the purposes of the sale of a dwelling underan incremental purchase arrangement (within the meaning of section
43) to an eligible household (within the meaning of paragraph (b) of
the definition of “eligible household ”insection 43 ).
21.—A housing authority shall —
(a) for the purposes of preparing an estimate under section
94(4)( a)(i) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 of
the amount of housing required for households assessedunder section 20 as being qualified for social housing
support,
(b) when preparing a draft housing services plan under
section 16 ,
(c) when preparing an accommodation programme under
section 7 of the Housing (Traveller Accommodation) Act1998, or
(d) as the Minister may from time to time direct,
prepare a summary, in the prescribed form, of the social housing
assessments carried out in its administrative area.
22.—(1) This section applies to —
(a) dwellings provided under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009
or Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000 —
(i) of which a housing authority is the owner, or
(ii) of which the housing authority is not the owner and
which are provided under a contract or leasebetween the housing authority and the owner con-cerned, including rental accommodation availabilityagreements,
and[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) dwellings owned and provided by approved bodies to
whom assistance is given under section 6 of the Act of1992 for the purposes of such provision.
(2) A housing authority may allocate a dwelling under this section
to a household in accordance with a scheme made under subsection
(3).
(3) A housing authority shall, not later than one year after the
coming into operation of this section, in accordance with this sectionand any regulations made thereunder, make a scheme (in this Actreferred to as an “allocation scheme ”) determining the order of
priority to be accorded in the allocation of dwellings to —
(a) households assessed under section 20 as being qualified for
social housing support, and
(b) households, in receipt of social housing support, that have
applied to the housing authority to transfer to anotherdwelling or to purchase a dwelling under Part 3 and the
housing authority consents to the transfer, or purchase,as the case may be.
(4) The Minister may make regulations providing for the matters
to be included in an allocation scheme, including the following:
(a) the manner in which dwellings, or different categories of
dwellings, are allocated to households;
(b) the order or priority in accordance with which dwellings
are allocated under the allocation scheme;
(c) the conditions relating to refusals by a household of
reasonable offers of social housing support offered inaccordance with an allocation scheme by reference to theavailability of social housing support in the administrativearea concerned, the number of offers made to, andrefusals made by, a household and the period duringwhich those offers and refusals are made.
(5) Having regard to section 19(4) , a housing authority shall make
provision in its allocation scheme for the proportion of dwellings inany part or parts of its administrative area which may be reservedfor all or any of the following purposes:
(a) allocation to particular classes of household;
(b) particular forms of tenure;
(c) allocation to households transferring from other forms of
social housing support.
(6) An allocation scheme may include conditions subject to which
the preference of a household to reside in a particular area or areasmay be taken into account in allocating a dwelling to such a house-hold, including, but not necessarily limited to, conditions relatingto—
(a) whether the household or any member of it currently
resides, or at any time has resided, and for what period,in the area or areas concerned,
23Pt.2 S.22Pt.2 S.22
24[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) the distance of the area or areas from the place of employ-
ment of any member of the household,
(c) whether any members of the household are attending any
university, college, school or other educational establish-ment in the area or areas concerned, and
(d) whether any relatives of any member of the household
reside in the area or areas concerned.
(7) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (2) , a housing
authority may disregard the order of priority given to a householdunder an allocation scheme where the household is being providedwith social housing support —
(a) in a dwelling let to the household under a Chapter 4 ten-
ancy agreement having been assessed under section
20(3) ,o r
(b) arising from specified exceptional circumstances, including
displacement by fire, flood or any other emergency,development, redevelopment or regeneration of an areaby the housing authority, or exceptional medical or com-passionate grounds.
(8) An allocation scheme may provide that the housing authority
shall obtain and have regard to a report from a medical practitioneremployed by the Health Service Executive in the allocation of dwell-ings where priority is claimed on grounds consisting of, or including,exceptional medical grounds.
(9) A housing authority may from time to time review its allo-
cation scheme and, as it considers necessary and appropriate, amendthe scheme or make a new scheme.
(10) The making of an allocation scheme, or the amendment to
such a scheme, are reserved functions.
(11) The allocation of a dwelling to a household is an executive
function.
(12) The manager shall —
(a) prepare and submit to the members of the housing auth-
ority not later than 30 April in each year a written reporton allocations made under its allocation scheme by speci-fying the different categories of dwellings and householdsand the proportions of each such category, by referenceto the total number of such allocations in the precedingyear, and
(b) provide a copy of the report prepared under paragraph (a)
to the Minister, if the Minister requests such a copy.
(13) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of section 11 of the
Act of 1988, a scheme of priorities made by a housing authorityunder that section and in force immediately before the coming intooperation of this section continues to have effect after such cominginto operation and is deemed to have been made under this sectionuntil an allocation scheme under this section comes into force.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(14) A housing authority shall make a copy of its allocation
scheme available for inspection by members of the public, withoutcharge, on the Internet and at its offices and such other places as itconsiders appropriate, during normal working hours.
(15) Before making or amending an allocation scheme, a housing
authority shall provide a draft of the scheme or amendment to thescheme, as the case may be, to the Minister, who may direct thehousing authority to amend the draft scheme or draft amendment,and the housing authority shall comply with any such direction withinsuch period as may be specified by the Minister.
(16) The Minister may, as he or she considers necessary and
appropriate, direct a housing authority to amend an allocationscheme, in such manner as he or she may direct, and the housingauthority shall comply with any such direction within such period asmay be specified by the Minister.
(17) ( a) The Minister may issue directions to a housing authority
regarding the operation of an allocation scheme and thehousing authority shall comply with any such direction inoperating the scheme.
(b) Nothing in paragraph (a) shall be construed or operate to
enable the Minister to direct the allocation of a dwellingto a specific household.
Chapter 4
Rental Accommodation Arrangements
23.—In this Chapter —
“Act of 2004 ”means the Residential Tenancies Act 2004;
“authorised agent ”has the same meaning as in the Act of 2004;
“dwelling to which this Chapter applies ”means a dwelling which is
the subject of a rental accommodation availability agreement;
“qualified tenant ”means a household assessed under section 20 as
being qualified for social housing support;
“rental accommodation availability agreement ”has the meaning
given to it by section 24 and references to “availability agreement ”
shall be construed accordingly;
“rental accommodation provider ”means a person who makes a
dwelling, of which he or she is the owner, available under a rentalaccommodation availability agreement for the purposes of letting toa qualified tenant in accordance with this Chapter, and references to“provider ”shall be construed accordingly;
“rent contribution ”has the meaning given to it by section 25 .
24.—(1) Subject to such regulations as may be made for the pur-
poses of this section and such terms and conditions as may be pre-scribed, a housing authority may, by order of the manager, enter into
an agreement (in this Act referred to as a “rental accommodation
25Pt.2 S.22
Interpretation
(Chapter 4 ).
Rental
accommodationavailabilityagreement.Pt.2 S.24
26[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
availability agreement ”) with a rental accommodation provider pur-
suant to the terms and conditions of which availability agreement theprovider agrees to —
(a) make the dwelling available for a specified period for the
purposes of this Chapter, and
(b) let the dwelling pursuant to a tenancy agreement —
(i) to such qualified tenant as the housing authority may
from time to time allocate to the tenancy in accord-ance with section 22 , or to the housing authority, or
(ii) to the qualified tenant specified in the availability
agreement,
in consideration of which availability agreement and subject to the
terms and conditions thereof and the tenancy agreement, the housingauthority guarantees the payment of the rent specified in the tenancyagreement and agrees to pay any other moneys, payable by the hous-ing authority, specified in the availability agreement or the tenancyagreement, as the case may be.
(2) A housing authority shall not enter into a rental accom-
modation availability agreement unless the provider —
(a) satisfies the housing authority, in accordance with regu-
lations made for the purposes of this section, that thedwelling complies with any standards for dwellings forthe time being prescribed under section 18 of the Act of1992, and
(b) gives to the housing authority —
(i) his or her tax reference number within the meaning of
section 888 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997, and
(ii) a current tax clearance certificate issued under section
1095 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997.
(3) A rental accommodation availability agreement shall be in
writing and shall include the following information —
(a) the address of the dwelling,
(b) the name and address for correspondence of the provider
and of the housing authority,
(c) the name and address for correspondence of the provider ’s
authorised agent (if any),
(d) if the provider or his or her authorised agent, as the case
may be, is a company, the registered number and regis-tered office of the company,
(e) a description of the dwelling, indicating —
(i) the estimated floor area,
(ii) the number of bed spaces,[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(iii) a statement as to which of the following categories it
belongs, namely, a whole or part of a house, a mai-sonette, an apartment or a flat and, where it is withinthe category of a house or maisonette, an indicationas to whether the house or maisonette is detached,semi-detached or terraced, and
(iv) the number of bedrooms,
and
(f) the term of the availability agreement.
(4) An availability agreement shall include terms and conditions
relating to —
(a) the payment of the rent and any other moneys, payable by
the housing authority, specified in the tenancyagreement,
(b) the responsibility of the provider in relation to any works
to be carried out, as are necessary to ensure that thedwelling complies with the standards for dwellings for thetime being prescribed under section 18 of the Act of 1992,before the commencement of the tenancy or where thereis more than one tenancy during the term of the avail-ability agreement, before each such tenancy,
(c) the registration by the provider under Part 7 of the Act of
2004 of the tenancy or each tenancy entered into duringthe term of the availability agreement,
(d) such access as may reasonably be required by officers or
agents authorised by the housing authority for the pur-poses of inspection of the dwelling during the term of theavailability agreement,
(e) termination of the availability agreement by the housing
authority or the provider, as the case may be, and
(f) such other matters as the housing authority considers
necessary and appropriate relating to the standard of theaccommodation concerned.
(5) The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of this
section providing for, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(a) the manner in which a provider shall satisfy the housing
authority for the purposes of subsection (2)(a) , including
by the provision of a certificate of compliance;
(b) the class or classes of persons who may provide a certifi-
cate of compliance referred to in paragraph (a) ;
(c) the information to be provided by a provider to the hous-
ing authority before entering into an availability agree-ment including information relating to the provider, hisor her authorised agent (if any) and the dwellingconcerned;
(d) in relation to the termination of an availability agreement
by the housing authority or the provider —
27Pt.2 S.24Pt.2 S.24
Chapter 4 tenancy
agreement.
28[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(i) the terms and conditions relating to, and procedures
for, termination,
(ii) the grounds on which an availability agreement may
be terminated,
(iii) the giving of notice and notice periods, and
(iv) the procedure for resolution of any dispute arising
from the proposed termination of the availabilityagreement including appeal procedures,
and
(e) the period within which a provider shall serve a notice of
termination on a qualified tenant pursuant to section
25(6) .
25.—(1) A housing authority may allocate a dwelling to which this
Chapter applies to a qualified tenant in accordance with section 22 .
(2) The provider shall, subject to the terms and conditions of the
rental accommodation availability agreement enter into a tenancyagreement (in this Act referred to as a “Chapter 4 tenancy
agreement ”) with the qualified tenant to whom the dwelling con-
cerned is allocated.
(3) A dwelling to which this Chapter applies which is the subject
of a Chapter 4 tenancy agreement shall not be construed as a dwell-
ing let by or to a public authority for the purposes of section 3(2) (c)
of the Act of 2004.
(4) A Chapter 4 tenancy agreement shall be in writing, for such
period as may be specified therein, and shall include the followingparticulars relating to the parties to the tenancy, the tenancy and thedwelling concerned:
(a) the address of the dwelling;
(b) the name of the tenant;
(c) the name and address for correspondence of the provider
and of the housing authority;
(d) the name and address for correspondence of the provider ’s
authorised agent (if any);
(e) if the provider or his or her authorised agent, as the case
may be, is a company, the registered number and regis-tered office of the company;
(f) a description of the dwelling;
(g) the date of commencement of the tenancy;
(h) where the tenancy is for a fixed term, the period of that
term.
(5) A Chapter 4 tenancy agreement shall, in addition to the obli-
gations imposed under Part 2 of the Act of 2004, include terms andconditions relating to —[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(a) occupation of the dwelling,
(b) the payment by the qualified tenant to the housing auth-
ority of an amount specified in the tenancy agreement (inthis Act referred to as the “rent contribution ”) at such
times as may be specified therein, and
(c) termination of the tenancy for —
(i) failure to pay the rent contribution in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the tenancy agreement,
(ii) breach of the terms and conditions relating to occu-
pation of the dwelling under paragraph (a) ,o r
(iii) knowingly permitting a person, against whom an
excluding order under section 3 of the Act of 1997or an interim excluding order under section 4 of thatAct is in force in respect of the dwelling concerned,to enter the dwelling in breach of the excluding orderor interim excluding order, as the case may be.
(6) ( a) Where a qualified tenant does any of the things specified
insubsection (5)(c) , he or she shall have failed to comply
with the obligations of the tenancy for the purposes ofsection 67 of the Act of 2004.
(b) Where it comes to the notice of the housing authority that
a tenant is doing or has done any of the things specifiedinsubsection (5)(c) or is or was behaving in a way that is
anti-social in breach of the obligation specified in section16(h) of the Act of 2004, the housing authority may notify
the provider in writing regarding the failure to complywith the said obligations.
(c) A provider, having received notification from the housing
authority under paragraph (b) , shall, within such period
as may be prescribed under section 24(5)(e) , if the pro-
vider has not already done so under section 67 of the Actof 2004, serve a notice of termination on the qualifiedtenant in accordance with subsection (2) of the saidsection 67.
(7) Where a provider serves a notice of termination on a qualified
tenant pursuant to a notice from a housing authority under subsec-
tion (6)(b) , the provider shall give a copy of the notice to the housing
authority as soon as practicable thereafter.
(8) Where the provider intends to serve notice of termination on
a qualified tenant in accordance with the terms and conditions of thetenancy agreement, other than pursuant to a notice from the housingauthority under subsection (6)(b) , the provider shall give notice in
writing to the housing authority not less than 14 days before servingthe notice of termination on the qualified tenant.
(9) Where the housing authority intends to apply to the District
Court for an excluding order against a person under section 3(2) ofthe Act of 1997, in respect of a dwelling the subject of a Chapter 4
tenancy agreement, the housing authority shall give notice in writingto the provider of its intention to apply not less than 14 days beforemaking the application.
29Pt.2 S.25Pt.2 S.25
Expenses incurred
by housingauthority.
Non-application of
certain provisions todisposals forpurposes of thisChapter.
Management and
control functions.
30[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(10) The rent contribution shall be determined by a housing auth-
ority in accordance with a rent scheme under section 31 .
(11) A housing authority may reduce the rent contribution pay-
able under a Chapter 4 tenancy agreement, for a specified period of
the tenancy, where the costs of the accommodation to the tenantbefore the tenancy agreement was entered into were substantiallylower than the costs under the tenancy agreement, resulting in hard-ship to the household.
26.—The Minister may, subject to the prior consent of the Minister
for Finance, make payments, out of moneys provided by theOireachtas, to a housing authority in respect of some or all of theexpenses, including administrative expenses, incurred by the auth-ority by virtue of this Chapter.
27.—Section 211(2) of the Planning and Development Act 2000
and section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 shall not applyto the disposal, for any of the purposes of this Chapter, of land or adwelling by a housing authority.
Chapter 5
Management and Control Functions
28.—(1) Subject to this section, the management and control of
any—
(a) dwelling, building, site or other land of which a housing
authority is the owner, or
(b) works or services provided by the authority under the
Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 ,
shall be vested in and exercised by the housing authority.
(2) Where a dwelling is provided by a housing authority under
theHousing Acts 1966 to 2009 or provided under Part V of the Plan-
ning and Development Act 2000, the management and control of thecommon areas appurtenant to and enjoyed with the dwelling are notrequired to be vested in the housing authority under subsection (1) .
(3) Subject to this section, a housing authority may perform man-
agement and control functions in respect of any dwelling of whichthe housing authority is not the owner and which is provided undera contract or lease between the housing authority and the owner ofthe dwelling, including a rental accommodation availabilityagreement.
(4) Subject to the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 and regulations
made thereunder, a housing authority may in respect of a dwellingor site to which subsection (1)(a) applies:
(a) allocate the dwelling to a household in accordance with
section 22 ;
(b) specify the terms and conditions of the tenancy agreement
between the housing authority and the tenant governingthe letting of the dwelling in accordance with section 29 ;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(c) specify such rent and make any other charges for the ten-
ancy, occupation or use of the dwelling as the housingauthority may determine from time to time in accordancewith section 31 ;
(d) in relation to any other building or land or works or
services provided under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 or
Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000, makesuch charges, whether by way of rent or otherwise, as itconsiders appropriate;
(e) sell the dwelling under section 90 of the Principal Act or
Part 3 or4;
(f) carry out such works of maintenance, repair or refur-
bishment, or other activities, as the housing authoritymay consider necessary and appropriate, for the purposesof securing the proper maintenance of the dwelling orthe estate in which the dwelling is situated and the goodmanagement of that estate, having regard to the objec-tives set out in its housing services plan.
(5) Subject to the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 and regulations
made thereunder, a housing authority may, in respect of a dwellingto which subsection (3) applies, subject to the provisions of any con-
tract or lease between the housing authority and the owner of thedwelling, including a rental accommodation availability agreement:
(a) allocate the dwelling to a household in accordance with
section 22 ;
(b) specify the terms and conditions of a tenancy agreement
governing the letting of the dwelling in accordance withsection 29 , as appropriate;
(c) specify such rent and any other charges for the tenancy,
occupation or use of the dwelling as the housing authoritymay determine from time to time in accordance withsection 31 ;
(d) carry out such works of maintenance, repair or refur-
bishment or other activities, as the authority may con-sider necessary and appropriate, for the purposes of sec-uring the proper maintenance of the dwelling or theestate in which the dwelling is situated and the good man-agement of that estate, having regard to the objectivesset out in its housing services plan.
(6) The Land Law (Ireland) Act 1881 shall not apply as respects
the letting by a housing authority of an allotment provided undersection 11 and such letting shall, unless a provision to the contrary is
contained in a letting agreement, be deemed to be a letting for tem-porary convenience and determinable at the end of any month.
29.—(1) This section applies to —
(a) a dwelling referred to in section 28(1) , and
(b) a dwelling referred to in section 28(3) , other than a dwell-
ing which is the subject of a rental accommodation avail-ability agreement.
31Pt.2 S.28
Tenancy
agreements.Pt.2 S.29
Delegation of
management andcontrol functions.
32[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(2) The letting of a dwelling to which this section applies shall
be subject to a tenancy agreement which shall be in writing, in theprescribed form and, subject to subsection (3) —
(a) shall include the terms and conditions specified in Sched-
ule 3 under which the household is permitted to occupy
or use the dwelling, and
(b) may include such other terms and conditions as the hous-
ing authority concerned considers necessary and appro-priate in respect of the letting.
(3) In the case of a dwelling referred to in subsection (1)(b) , the
terms and conditions of a tenancy agreement shall be subject to theterms of the contract or lease between the housing authority and theowner of the dwelling.
(4) The Minister may by regulations prescribe all or any one or
more of the following:
(a) the form or forms of tenancy agreement;
(b) the term of a tenancy by reference to a specified class or
specified classes of dwelling and whether the tenancy isperiodic or for a fixed term;
(c) the notice periods required for termination of a class or
classes of tenancy by the housing authority or tenant, asthe case may be;
(d) procedures for termination of a tenancy by the housing
authority or tenant, as the case may be.
30.—(1) Subject to such regulations as may be made for the pur-
poses of this section, a housing authority may delegate to a desig-nated body all or any one or more of its functions (includingmaintenance) in respect of the management and control of a dwellingof which it is the owner.
(2) A delegation by a housing authority under subsection (1)
shall specify —
(a) the designated body for the purposes of the delegation,
(b) the functions being delegated to the designated body, and
(c) the dwellings to which the delegation applies.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) , the Mini-
ster may make regulations providing for, but not necessarily limitedto, all or any one or more of the following:
(a) the constitution and composition of a designated body;
(b) the procedures of a designated body;
(c) the terms and conditions of a delegation;
(d) the form of an agreement between a housing authority and
a designated body in relation to a delegation;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(e) the class or classes of dwellings in respect of which a del-
egation may be made;
(f) the monitoring by a housing authority of activities being
carried out by a designated body under a delegation,including the inspection by the authority of dwellings;
(g) the provision by a designated body of periodic reports and
accounts on its activities to a housing authority;
(h) the auditing of the annual accounts of a designated body.
(4) A housing authority may, at its discretion, revoke a delegation
under this section whereupon the functions which had been del-egated shall again be vested in and exercised by the authority witheffect from a date specified in the resolution revoking the delegation.
(5) The delegation of a function to a designated body or the revo-
cation of any such delegation under this section shall be reservedfunctions.
(6) A delegation under subsection (1) may provide for all or any
of the following:
(a) arrangements in relation to the carrying out of works of
maintenance, repair or environmental improvement orancillary works;
(b) the collection of rent or any other charges due to the hous-
ing authority from a tenant, in accordance with a rentscheme under section 31 ;
(c) the assignment of all or any part of the proceeds of such
rent or other charges to the designated body to defray inwhole or in part the costs of management and mainten-ance of a dwelling and common areas appurtenant tosuch dwelling;
(d) the right of the housing authority to inspect any book,
document or other record (including records stored in anon-legible form) of the designated body in relation tothe management and control of a dwelling;
(e) assistance by the housing authority to the designated body
whether financial or otherwise;
(f) any other related or incidental matter which the housing
authority considers appropriate, including matters set outin the relevant housing services plan relating to the policyon management and maintenance of dwellings owned bythe housing authority.
(7) For the purposes of this section “designated body ”means an
association, council, committee or other body whether corporate orunincorporated which is —
(a) (i) established by and represents residents of an area
within which are located dwellings that are to be thesubject of a delegation under this section, or
(ii) established jointly by such residents and the housing
authority and any other person or body (whether
33Pt.2 S.30Pt.2 S.30
Rent schemes and
charges.
34[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
corporate or unincorporated) approved of by the
authority,
and
(b) declared by the authority by resolution to be a designated
body for the purposes of this section.
31.—(1) This section applies to a dwelling provided under the
Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 or Part V of the Planning and Develop-
ment Act 2000 —
(a) of which the housing authority is the owner, or
(b) of which the housing authority is not the owner and which
is provided under a contract or lease between the housingauthority and the owner of the dwelling, including arental accommodation availability agreement.
(2) In this section references to rent include a rent contribution
payable by a tenant under a Chapter 4 tenancy agreement.
(3) A housing authority may, in accordance with this section, in
respect of a dwelling to which this section applies —
(a) charge such rent or make such other charge for the ten-
ancy or occupation thereof as it may determine from timeto time, and
(b) in respect of works or services provided under the Housing
Acts 1966 to 2009 or Part V of the Planning and Develop-
ment Act 2000, make such charge, whether by rent orotherwise, as it considers appropriate.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (3) , charges
made under that subsection may include —
(a) charges relating to the provision of services to, and the
insurance of, a dwelling and other charges relating to themanagement and control of the dwelling, and
(b) charges relating to —
(i) the management and control of common areas
appurtenant to a dwelling where such common areasare also used by the occupants of other dwellings,and
(ii) the provision of services where those services are also
provided to the occupants of other dwellings.
(5) ( a) A housing authority shall, in accordance with this section
and regulations made for the purposes of this section,within one year of its coming into operation, make ascheme (in this Act referred to as a “rent scheme ”) pro-
viding for the manner in which rents and other chargesreferred to in subsection (3) shall be determined.
(b) A housing authority may, from time to time, as it considers
appropriate, or as the Minister directs, revoke the rentscheme and make a new rent scheme.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(6) The Minister may, for the purposes of this section, by regu-
lations provide for the matters to be included in a rent schemeincluding:
(a) the manner in which the financial circumstances of house-
holds and their ability to pay rent shall be taken intoaccount in determining rent, including the level, type andsources of household income that may be assessed for thepurpose of determining rents;
(b) the manner in which the size, standard, location and amen-
ity of any class or classes of dwellings shall be taken intoaccount in determining rent, having regard to the marketrent in respect of dwellings of a similar size, standard,location and amenity situated in the administrative areaconcerned;
(c) the manner in which adjustments may be made to the rent
in respect of any obligations imposed on the tenant underthe tenancy agreement relating to the maintenance ofthe dwelling;
(d) the amount, or method of calculation, of any allowances
in respect of rent which may be made for dependents;
(e) the procedure for rent review including rent increases dur-
ing the period of the tenancy having regard to the costof providing social housing support and any changes inhousehold circumstances or income levels;
(f) the manner in which the charges referred to in subsection
(4)shall be determined;
(g) the waiving of rent and other charges, in whole or in part,
on a temporary basis, in case of financial hardship.
(7) The making and revocation of a rent scheme are reserved
functions.
(8) The charging of rents or other charges referred to in subsec-
tion (3) in respect of a dwelling to which this section applies and the
review of such rents or other charges in accordance with a rentscheme are executive functions.
(9) A housing authority shall make a copy of its rent scheme avail-
able for inspection by members of the public, without charge, onthe Internet and at its offices and such other places as it considersappropriate, during normal working hours.
32.—(1) This section applies to —
(a) a household which has applied for housing support and in
respect of whom a decision has not been made to providea dwelling or site, including a household which appliedfor housing support before the coming into operation ofthis section,
(b) a household in respect of whom —
(i) a social housing assessment is being carried out under
section 20(3) , and
35Pt.2 S.31
Information
requirements.Pt.2 S.32
36[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(ii) a decision has not yet been made to allocate a
dwelling,
and
(c) a household in receipt of housing support, whether before
or after the coming into operation of this section.
(2) In the performance of its functions under the Housing Acts
1966 to 2009 , a housing authority may request —
(a) a household to which this section applies, to give to the
housing authority all or any of the following information:
(i) the number of household members, together with the
age, sex, occupation and condition of health of eachmember;
(ii) the weekly income of each household member,
including any assistance, benefit or allowancereceived by or on behalf of any household memberunder the Social Welfare Acts, the Health Acts 1947to 2008 or the legislation of any other state or fromany other source;
(iii) the means of transport available to the household and
the cost of such transport,
and
(b) in the case of a household referred to in subsection (1)(a)
or(b), to give to it all or any of the following information:
(i) the terms upon which premises are currently occupied
by the household, the amount of rent payable inrespect of such premises and the name and addressof the person to whom rent is payable;
(ii) any dwelling or site provided by a housing authority,
or an approved body, previously let or sold to thehousehold or any household member at any timebefore the application is made;
(iii) any dwelling previously let to the household or any
household member under a Chapter 4 tenancy agree-
ment at any time before the application is made.
(3) A request for information shall be in writing and shall specify
a period of not less than 14 days from the date of the request withinwhich the information shall be given to the housing authority.
(4) Information shall be given in writing unless the housing auth-
ority agrees to the information being given in another form and sub-ject to any conditions it may specify.
(5) Without prejudice to subsection (2) , for the purposes of carry-
ing out social housing assessments under section 20 , the Minister may
make regulations providing for —
(a) the form in which an application for social housing support
shall be made, including by electronic means,[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) the information and particulars to be provided by a house-
hold applying for social housing support and verificationof such information and particulars,
(c) the furnishing of such additional information as a housing
authority considers appropriate for the purposes of carry-ing out an assessment,
(d) the period within which the information and particulars,
including any additional information, shall be providedby the household concerned, and
(e) such other matters as the Minister considers necessary
and appropriate.
(6) ( a) Without prejudice to subsection (2) , the Minister may
make regulations for the purposes of —
(i) the purchase of a dwelling under an incremental pur-
chase arrangement under Part 3 ,
(ii) the purchase of an apartment under Part 4 ,o r
(iii) the purchase of a dwelling under an affordable dwell-
ing purchase arrangement under Part 5 .
(b) Regulations made under this subsection may provide for
the following:
(i) the form and manner in which an application to pur-
chase may be made, including by electronic means;
(ii) the information and particulars to be provided by a
household applying to purchase and verification ofsuch information and particulars;
(iii) the furnishing of such additional information as the
housing authority considers appropriate for the pur-poses of considering the application;
(iv) the period within which the information and part-
iculars, including any additional information, shall beprovided by the household making the application,and
(v) such other matters as the Minister considers necessary
and appropriate.
(7) ( a) A person is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding \2,000 where he or she
is a member of a household requested to give informationto a housing authority under this section or any regu-lations made under subsection (5) or(6), as the case may
be, and he or she —
(i) knowingly makes any statement or representation
(whether written or verbal) which is to his or herknowledge false or misleading in any materialrespect, or knowingly conceals any material fact, or
37Pt.2 S.32Pt.2 S.32
Moneys owing to
housing authority.
38[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(ii) produces or furnishes, or causes or knowingly allows
to be produced or furnished, any document or infor-mation which he or she knows to be false in amaterial particular.
(b) An offence under paragraph (a) may be prosecuted by the
housing authority who requested the informationreferred to in that paragraph.
(8) Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection
(7)(a) and by reason of that offence the housing authority incurred
a higher level of expenditure in providing housing support for ahousehold than it would have incurred otherwise, any such expendi-ture shall be repayable to the housing authority and the person orthe personal representative of that person shall be liable to pay tothe housing authority, on demand, the expenditure so repayable andthat expenditure, if not so repaid, may be recovered by the housingauthority as a simple contract debt in any court of competentjurisdiction.
(9) Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection
(7)(a) and by reason of that offence the housing authority charged a
lower rent in respect of the provision of housing support than itwould otherwise have charged, the amount by which the rent wasundercharged shall be repayable to the housing authority and theperson or the personal representative of that person shall be liableto pay to the housing authority, on demand, the amount so repayableand that amount, if not so repaid, may be recovered by the housingauthority as a simple contract debt in any court of competentjurisdiction.
33.—(1) This section applies to the following provisions:
(a)sections 28 ,31,32(8) and (9),47(4) ,48(5) and (6),75(4) ,
76(5) ,98and 99;
(b) section 13 of the Act of 1988;
(c) sections 3 and 11 of the Act of 1992;
(d) section 25 of the Housing (Traveller Accommodation) Act
1998; and
(e) sections 9 and 10 of the Act of 2002.
(2) Interest is payable in accordance with this section on so much
of any rent, charges, fees or loan repayments or any other moneysdue and owing to a housing authority under any of the provisions towhich this section applies which remain unpaid in respect of theperiod between the date on which the moneys become payable andthe date on which payment is made.
(3) The rate of interest payable under subsection (2) shall be that
for the time being prescribed for the purposes of this section but inany case shall not be more than the rate for the time being applicableto a High Court civil judgement debt.
(4) Where there are moneys due and owing by a household to a
housing authority under any of the provisions to which this section[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
applies and, at the same time, another sum is due by the local auth-
ority concerned to that household, the former sum may be set offagainst the latter, in whole or in part, as appropriate.
34.—(1) This section applies to the following provisions:
(a)sections 28 ,31and 32(8) and (9);
(b) section 13 of the Act of 1988;
(c) sections 3 and 11 of the Act of 1992, and
(d) section 25 of the Housing (Traveller Accommodation)
Act 1998.
(2) Where there are moneys due and owing by a household to a
housing authority under any of the provisions to which this sectionapplies and the housing authority is satisfied that the householdwould otherwise suffer undue hardship, the housing authority mayenter into arrangements with the household for the payment of thosemoneys (together with any interest that may have accrued undersection 33(2) ) by such instalments and at such times as the housing
authority considers reasonable in all the circumstances in addition toany rent, charges, fees or loan repayments that the household is pay-ing to the authority.
35.—(1) A housing authority shall, within one year of the coming
into operation of this section, draw up and adopt a strategy (in thissection referred to as an “anti-social behaviour strategy ”) in respect
of that part or those parts of its administrative area in which aresituated —
(a) dwellings let by the housing authority to tenants under the
Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 ,
(b) dwellings which are the subject of Chapter 4 tenancy
agreements,
(c) dwellings in which relevant purchasers (within the mean-
ing of section 1 of the Act of 1997) reside, and
(d) sites (within the meaning of section 1 of the Act of 1997).
(2) An anti-social behaviour strategy shall have as its principal
objectives —
(a) the prevention and reduction of anti-social behaviour,
(b) the co-ordination of services within the housing authority
directed at dealing with, or preventing or reducing, anti-social behaviour,
(c) the promotion of co-operation with other persons, includ-
ing the Garda S íochána, in the performance of their
respective functions insofar as they relate to dealing with,or the prevention or reduction of, anti-social behaviour,having regard to the need to avoid duplication of activi-ties by the housing authority and such other persons inthe performance of those functions, and
39Pt.2 S.33
Arrangements with
households forpayment of moneysdue and owing tohousing authority.
Anti-social
behaviour strategy.Pt.2 S.35
Interpretation
(Chapter 6 ).
40[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(d) the promotion of good estate management.
(3) An anti-social behaviour strategy shall set out the proposals
of the housing authority for achieving the principal objectivesreferred to in subsection (2) , including, but not necessarily limited to,
the following:
(a) procedures in relation to the making of complaints to the
housing authority in respect of anti-social behaviour;
(b) initiatives for the prevention and reduction of anti-social
behaviour;
(c) the provision of education relating to, and the carrying out
of research into, anti-social behaviour and its preventionand reduction.
(4) A housing authority —
(a) shall, not less than 6 months before the expiration of its
housing services plan, and
(b) may, from time to time as it thinks fit,
review its anti-social behaviour strategy and amend the strategy or
draw up and adopt a new strategy, as it considers appropriate.
(5) When drawing up a strategy, or before amending a strategy, a
housing authority shall consult with —
(a) any joint policing committee established under section 36
of the Garda S íochána Act 2005 in respect of its adminis-
trative area,
(b) the Garda S íochána,
(c) the Health Service Executive, and
(d) any other person as the authority considers appropriate.
(6) The drawing up and adoption of, and the amendment of, an
anti-social behaviour strategy shall be a reserved function.
(7) The drawing up and adoption of, and amendment of, an anti-
social behaviour strategy is not to be taken to confer on any persona right in law that the person would not otherwise have to require ahousing authority in a particular case to exercise any function con-ferred on it under the Act of 1997 or this Act or to seek damagesfor a housing authority ’s failure to perform any such function.
Chapter 6
Homelessness Action Plans
36.—In this Chapter —
“management group ”has the meaning given to it by section 39 ;
“responsible housing authority ”has the meaning given to it by
section 38 ;
“specified body ”means —[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(a) an Foras Áiseanna Saothair,
(b) the Irish Prison Service, where there is a prison located
in—
(i) the administrative area of the housing authority, or
(ii) in the case of a joint homelessness consultative forum,
the administrative area of any housing authorityconcerned,
(c) the Probation Service,
(d) a vocational education committee within the meaning of
section 7 of the Vocational Education Act 1930 whosefunctional area corresponds to —
(i) the administrative area of the housing authority, or
(ii) in the case of a joint homelessness consultative forum,
the administrative area of any housing authorityconcerned,
and
(e) such other body as may be prescribed for the purposes of
this Chapter.
37.—(1) A housing authority shall, in respect of its administrative
area, not later than 8 months after the coming into operation of thisChapter, adopt a plan (in this Act referred to as a “homelessness
action plan ”) to address homelessness.
(2) A homelessness action plan shall specify the measures pro-
posed to be undertaken to address homelessness in the administra-tive area or administrative areas concerned by the housing authorityor housing authorities, as the case may be, the Health Service Execu-tive, specified bodies, or approved bodies or other bodies providingservices to address homelessness or the performance of whose func-tions may affect or relate to the provision of such services, includingbut not necessarily limited to measures to achieve the followingobjectives —
(a) the prevention of homelessness,
(b) the reduction of homelessness in its extent or duration,
(c) the provision of services, including accommodation, to
address the needs of homeless households,
(d) the provision of assistance under section 10(b)(i) , as neces-
sary, to persons who were formerly homeless, and
(e) the promotion of effective co-ordination of activities pro-
posed to be undertaken by the bodies referred to in thissubsection for the purposes of addressing homelessnessin the administrative area or areas concerned.
(3) A homelessness action plan shall be in writing and shall take
account of —
41Pt.2 S.36
Homelessness
action plan.Pt.2 S.37
Homelessness
consultative forum.
42[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(a) any available information regarding the extent of the need
for services to address homelessness, including, in thecase of housing supports, any summary of social housingassessments prepared under section 21 in respect of
homeless households,
(b) the costs of the proposed measures referred to in subsec-
tion (2) and the financial resources that are available or
are likely to be available for the period of the home-lessness action plan to the housing authority or housingauthorities concerned, the Health Service Executive orany specified body, as the case may be, for the purposesof undertaking those measures and the need to ensurethe most beneficial, effective and efficient use of suchresources,
(c) such policies and objectives for the time being of the
Government or the Minister in so far as they may affector relate to the provision of services to homeless per-sons, and
(d) such other matters as the Minister may specify in a direc-
tion given to the housing authority under subsection (4) ,
including (except in the case of the first homelessnessaction plan) a review of progress made in the implemen-tation of the homelessness action plan during the periodof the previous plan.
(4) ( a) The Minister may, from time to time, give directions in
writing to a housing authority for the purpose of eitheror both of the following —
(i) providing guidance as to the form and content of a
homelessness action plan, and
(ii) specifying the period for which such a plan is to
remain in force, which period shall not in any casebe less than 3 years.
(b) The housing authority shall comply with any directions
given under paragraph (a) .
38.—(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), as soon as practicable
after the coming into operation of this Chapter and having regard tosection 37(1) , a housing authority shall establish a body to be known
as the homelessness consultative forum and shall appoint itsmembers.
(2) The functions of a homelessness consultative forum are to
provide information, views, advice or reports, as appropriate, to themanagement group in relation to —
(a) homelessness and the operation and implementation of
the homelessness action plan in the administrative areaconcerned,
(b) the provisions of the draft homelessness action plan, and
(c) any proposed modification of the draft homelessness
action plan pursuant to section 40(6) .[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(3) Where either or both of the conditions specified in subsection
(4)(a) are met or where the Minister so directs pursuant to subsection
(4)(b) , a housing authority shall enter into an arrangement with any
other housing authority whose administrative area adjoins theadministrative area of the housing authority concerned or with anyother housing authority, as appropriate, to establish a joint home-lessness consultative forum which shall perform the functions speci-fied in subsection (2) in relation to the administrative areas of the
housing authorities which are parties to the arrangement.
(4) ( a) The conditions referred to in subsection (3) are that the
housing authority considers that —
(i) a joint homelessness consultative forum would further
the objectives of a homelessness action plan becauseof the extent or nature of homelessness in its admin-istrative area, or
(ii) a joint homelessness consultative forum and the shar-
ing of administrative services relating thereto wouldensure the most beneficial, effective and efficient useof resources.
(b) The Minister may, where he or she considers it appro-
priate, direct housing authorities to enter into an arrange-ment pursuant to subsection (3) and the housing auth-
orities shall comply with any such direction.
(5) In the case of an arrangement pursuant to subsection (3) for
the establishment of a joint homelessness consultative forum, thehousing authorities concerned shall, by agreement in writing, appointone housing authority (in this Chapter referred to as the “responsible
housing authority ”) for the purposes of the performance, on behalf
of the housing authorities concerned, of their functions under thisChapter.
(6) A housing authority or, in the case of a joint homelessness
consultative forum, the responsible housing authority, in accordancewith such directions as the Minister may give under section 41 , shall
appoint a chairperson of the homelessness consultative forum orjoint homelessness consultative forum, as the case may be, from themembership thereof.
(7) The chairperson appointed under subsection (6) shall also be
the chairperson of the management group.
(8) The membership of the homelessness consultative forum shall
comprise the following persons:
(a) one or more than one employee of the housing authority
or, in the case of a joint homelessness consultative forum,one or more than one employee of each of the housingauthorities concerned nominated by the housing auth-ority or housing authorities concerned, as the case maybe;
(b) one or more than one employee of the Health Service
Executive nominated by the Health Service Executive;
(c) subject to such directions as the Minister may give under
section 41(1)(a) , persons nominated by specified bodies,
and
43Pt.2 S.38Pt.2 S.38
Management group.
44[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(d) subject to subsection (9) , persons nominated by —
(i) approved bodies, and
(ii) any other bodies,
providing services to homeless persons in the administra-
tive area or, in the case of a joint homelessness consulta-tive forum, administrative areas concerned or the per-formance of whose functions may affect or relate to theprovision of such services, as the housing authority orresponsible authority, as the case may be, consider appro-priate in accordance with such directions as the Ministermay give under section 41 .
(9) The number of persons referred to in subsection (8)(d) shall
not exceed one half of the membership of the homelessness consulta-tive forum or joint homelessness consultative forum, as the casemay be.
(10) A homelessness consultative forum or joint homelessness
consultative forum, as the case may be, shall regulate, by standingorders or otherwise, the meetings and proceedings of the forum.
(11) The housing authority or, in the case of a joint homelessness
consultative forum, the housing authorities concerned, may providesuch services and support relating to the operation of the home-lessness consultative forum or joint homelessness consultative forum,as the case may be, as is considered necessary by the housing auth-ority or housing authorities, in accordance with such directions asthe Minister may give under section 41 .
(12) The proceedings of a homelessness consultative forum or
joint homelessness consultative forum, as the case may be, shall notbe invalidated by any vacancies among the membership.
39.—(1) The housing authority or responsible housing authority,
as the case may be, shall appoint a group (in this Chapter referredto as a “management group ”) consisting of certain members of the
homelessness consultative forum or joint homelessness consultativeforum, as the case may be, being such person or persons referred toinsection 38(8)(a) ,(b)and(c)as the housing authority or responsible
authority, as the case may be, considers appropriate in accordancewith such directions as the Minister may give under section 41 .
(2) The management group may regulate, by standing orders or
otherwise, its meetings and proceedings.
(3) The housing authority or responsible housing authority, as the
case may be, may provide such services and support relating to theoperation of the management group, as such housing authority con-siders appropriate, in accordance with such directions as the Ministermay give under section 41 .
(4) The management group —
(a) shall perform the functions conferred on it by this Chapter
in relation to the preparation and modification of thedraft homelessness action plan and the review of thehomelessness action plan, and[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) may make recommendations to the housing authority or,
in the case of a joint homelessness consultative forum,the housing authorities concerned, to the Health ServiceExecutive or to any specified body, in relation to all orany of the following:
(i) services required to address homelessness in the
administrative area or administrative areasconcerned;
(ii) funding for such services taking into account the fin-
ancial resources that are available or are likely tobe available;
(iii) the operation of the homelessness action plan having
regard to any information, views, advice or reportsprovided by the homelessness consultative forum orjoint homelessness consultative forum, as the casemay be.
(5) The proceedings of a management group shall not be invali-
dated by any vacancies among the membership.
40.—(1) The manager of a housing authority or of a responsible
housing authority, as the case may be, not later than 6 weeks afterthe coming into operation of this Chapter, shall send a request, inwriting, to the chairperson of the management group to arrange forthe preparation of a draft homelessness action plan in respect of theadministrative area concerned or, in the case of a joint homelessnessconsultative forum, the administrative areas concerned.
(2) For the purposes of preparing a draft homelessness action plan
under this section and before submission of the draft homelessnessaction plan pursuant to subsection (3) , the management group —
(a) shall consult —
(i) the other members of the homelessness consultative
forum or joint homelessness consultative forum, asthe case may be, and
(ii) any town council whose administrative area is con-
tained in the administrative area of the housing auth-ority, or, in the case of a joint homelessness consulta-tive forum, in the administrative areas of the housingauthorities, to which the plan relates,
and
(b) may consult any housing authority whose administrative
area adjoins the administrative area of the housing auth-ority concerned or, in the case of a joint homelessnessconsultative forum, the administrative areas of the hous-ing authorities concerned.
(3) Not later than 10 weeks from the date on which the request
referred to in subsection (1) is sent, the management group shall
approve and submit the draft homelessness action plan to the hous-ing authority or, in the case of a joint homelessness consultativeforum, each of the housing authorities concerned for adoption.
45Pt.2 S.39
Preparation of draft
plan and making ofplan.Pt.2 S.40
46[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(4) Subject to subsections (5) to(8), the housing authority, or, in
the case of a joint homelessness consultative forum, each of the hous-ing authorities concerned, shall adopt the homelessness action planwithin 6 weeks of receipt of the draft homelessness action plan, withor without modification.
(5) Where any part of a draft homelessness action plan relates to
the functions of the Health Service Executive or of a specified body,the housing authority, or responsible housing authority, as the casemay be, shall send a request in writing to the chairperson of themanagement group to seek its approval to any proposed modifi-cation pursuant to subsection (4) in respect of such part of the draft
plan.
(6) The management group, not later than 3 weeks from the date
on which the request referred to in subsection (5) is sent, following
consultation with the other members of the homelessness consulta-tive forum, or joint homelessness consultative forum, as the case maybe, shall —
(a) accept or reject the proposed modification referred to in
subsection (5) , and
(b) notify, in writing, the housing authority or responsible
housing authority, as the case may be, of the decision andthe reasons for that decision.
(7) The housing authority or, in the case of a joint homelessness
consultative forum, each of the housing authorities concerned, shalladopt the homelessness action plan not later than 6 weeks from thedate on which the notification under subsection (6) is sent, with the
modification, in a case where it is accepted by the managementgroup, or without the modification, in a case where it is rejected.
(8) Where the housing authority or, in the case of a joint home-
lessness consultative forum, any of the housing authorities con-cerned, fail to adopt the homelessness action plan in accordance withthis section, the manager of each housing authority, as appropriate,shall, by order, as soon as practicable and in any event not later thanthe end of the period referred to in section 37(1) , adopt the draft
homelessness action plan in accordance with subsection (4) or(7),
as appropriate.
(9) The housing authority or responsible housing authority, as the
case may be, shall —
(a) give a copy of the homelessness action plan to the Minister
and each member of the homelessness consultative forumor joint homelessness consultative forum, as the case maybe, as soon as practicable after it is adopted,
(b) make the homelessness action plan available for inspection
on request by any person, without charge, at its officesand such other places as it considers appropriate, duringnormal office hours,
(c) on request by any person, provide a copy of the home-
lessness action plan at a price not exceeding the reason-able cost of reproduction, and
(d) publish and maintain a copy of the homelessness action
plan on the Internet for the period of the plan.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(10) A housing authority or responsible housing authority, as the
case may be, may, at any time, and shall, in any case, not less than 8months before the end of the period of the homelessness action plandecide to arrange for —
(a) the review and, where appropriate, amendment of the
homelessness action plan, or
(b) the preparation and adoption of a new homelessness
action plan.
(11) Where a housing authority or responsible housing authority,
as the case may be, makes a decision for the purposes of subsection
(10), the manager of the housing authority or responsible housing
authority, as the case may be, shall send a request in writing to thechairperson of the management group to arrange for the review ofthe homelessness action plan or the preparation of a new home-lessness action plan and subsections (2) to(9)shall apply accordingly
with any necessary modifications.
(12) Subject to subsection (8) , the adoption or amendment of a
homelessness action plan is a reserved function.
(13) ( a) Notwithstanding section 37(1) , where, before the coming
into operation of this Chapter, a housing authority hasadopted a plan which meets the conditions specified inparagraph (b) , then such a plan is deemed to be a home-
lessness action plan duly adopted by the housing auth-ority for the purposes of this Chapter.
(b) The conditions referred to in paragraph (a) are that the
plan —
(i) specifies the measures proposed to be undertaken to
achieve the objectives of a homelessness action planspecified in section 37(2) , and
(ii) does not expire before the end of one year after the
date of coming into operation of this Chapter.
41.—(1) The Minister may give directions to a housing authority
or responsible housing authority, as the case may be, in relation toall or any of the following:
(a) the number of members and composition, including an
appropriate gender balance, of a homelessness consulta-tive forum or joint homelessness consultative forum, asthe case may be;
(b) the number of members and composition of a manage-
ment group;
(c) the period of appointment of the members of a home-
lessness consultative forum or joint homelessness con-sultative forum, as the case may be, and the manage-ment group;
(d) the terms and conditions of appointment (including terms
and conditions relating to removal, resignation, the fillingof casual vacancies and re-appointment) of the members
47Pt.2 S.40
Ministerial
directions.Pt.2 S.41
Power of Minister
to prescribe body asspecified body.
Interpretation
(Part 3 ).
48[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
of a homelessness consultative forum or joint home-
lessness consultative forum, as the case may be, and themanagement group;
(e) the appointment of the chairperson of a homelessness con-
sultative forum or of the joint homelessness consultativeforum, as the case may be;
(f) services and support relating to the operation of the home-
lessness consultative forum, joint homelessness consulta-tive forum or management group, as the case may be.
(2) A housing authority or responsible housing authority, as the
case may be, shall, in the performance of its functions under thisChapter, comply with any directions given by the Minister undersubsection (1) .
42.—The Minister may prescribe any body which provides services
to address homelessness or the performance of whose functions mayaffect or relate to the provision of such services to be a specifiedbody and any body so prescribed shall be a specified body for thepurposes of this Chapter.
PART 3
INCREMENTAL PURCHASE ARRANGEMENTS
43.—(1) In this Part —
“charging order ”has the meaning given to it by section 46 ;
“charged period ”has the meaning given to it by section 46 ;
“charged share ”has the meaning given to it by section 46 ;
“eligible household ”means —
(a) a household assessed by a housing authority under section
20as being qualified for social housing support, which
has been allocated a dwelling to which this Part appliesin accordance with an allocation scheme and which hasresided in the dwelling concerned for not more than 5years from the date of the allocation, or
(b) subject to subsection (2) , a household referred to in section
22(5)(c) which has been allocated a dwelling to which this
Part applies in accordance with an allocation scheme;
“incremental purchase arrangement ”has the meaning given to it by
section 45;
“incremental release ”has the meaning given to it by section 46 ;
“market value ”, in relation to a dwelling to which this Part applies,
means the price for which the unencumbered fee simple of the dwell-ing might reasonably be expected to be sold on the open market and,in a case where the site for the dwelling was provided to the housingauthority by the eligible household for a nominal sum, excludes an[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
amount equal to the excess (if any) of the market value of the site
over such sum;
“net market value ”means the market value reduced by an allowance
equal to the amount of the market value attributable to materialimprovements;
“purchase money ”, in relation to a dwelling to which this Part
applies, means the monetary value of the proportion of the purchaseprice of the dwelling fixed by the housing authority, in accordancewith regulations made under section 49 for the purposes of calculat-
ing the purchase money, as the proportion that is required to be paidto purchase the dwelling;
“purchase price ”, in relation to a dwelling to which this Part applies,
means the price of the dwelling determined by a housing authorityin accordance with regulations made under section 49 for the pur-
poses of calculating the purchase price;
“purchaser ”means a person who purchases a dwelling under an
incremental purchase arrangement and includes a person in whomthere subsequently becomes vested (other than for valuableconsideration) the interest of the purchaser or his or her successorin title and the personal representative of that person or successorin title;
“transfer order ”has the meaning given to it by section 45 .
(2) A housing authority shall not proceed with the sale of a dwell-
ing under an incremental purchase arrangement to a householdreferred to in paragraph (b) of the definition of “eligible household ”
insubsection(1) where —
(a) at any time during the 3 years immediately before applying
to the authority to purchase a dwelling under this Part,the household was in arrears of rent for an accumulatedperiod of 12 weeks or more in respect of any dwelling orsite let to them by any housing authority under the Hous-
ing Acts 1966 to 2009 or provided under Part V of the
Planning and Development Act 2000, and
(b) the housing authority has not entered into an arrangement
under section 34 with the household for the payment of
the moneys due and owing to the housing authority inrespect of those arrears.
44.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , this Part applies to a dwelling —
(a) provided by a housing authority under the Housing Acts
1966 to 2009 or by an approved body with the assistance
of a housing authority under section 6 of the Act of 1992or provided under Part V of the Planning and Develop-ment Act 2000 —
(i) constructed after the coming into operation of this
Part, or the construction of which began before thecoming into operation of this Part and which is com-pleted after such coming into operation and which isallocated to an eligible household in accordance withan allocation scheme within one year of its com-pletion, or
49Pt.3 S.43
Application of Part
3to certain
dwellings.Pt.3 S.44
Sale of dwelling by
incrementalpurchasearrangement.
50[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(ii) which has not previously been let in accordance with
an allocation scheme and is vacant on the cominginto operation of this Part,
and
(b) and which is of a class of dwelling prescribed for the pur-
poses of this Part as being a class of dwelling to which anincremental purchase arrangement may apply.
(2) ( a) This Part does not apply to a dwelling referred to in sub-
section (1) which is —
(i) an apartment in a designated apartment complex, or
(ii) a dwelling which is a separate and self-contained
apartment in a premises, divided into 2 or moreapartments, which requires arrangements for theupkeep and management of all or any part of thecommon areas, structures, works or services otherthan by the purchaser.
(b) For the purposes of paragraph (a)(i) ,“apartment ”and
“designated apartment complex ”have the same meaning
as they have in section 50 .
45.—(1) Subject to and in accordance with this Part and the Hous-
ing Acts 1966 to 2009 and subject to such regulations as may be made
under section 49 , a housing authority or an approved body may enter
into an arrangement (in this Part referred to as an “incremental pur-
chase arrangement ”) with an eligible household whereby, in con-
sideration of the receipt by the housing authority of the purchasemoney, the housing authority may sell a dwelling to which this Partapplies, in the state of repair and condition existing on the date ofsale, to the eligible household, by means of an order (in this Partreferred to as a “transfer order ”), in the prescribed form, which shall
be expressed and shall operate to vest, on the date specified in theorder, the interest specified in the order, in accordance with theterms and conditions specified in subsection (2) and the terms and
conditions of a charging order.
(2) The terms and conditions referred to in subsection (1) shall
include the following:
(a) that where the purchaser sells the dwelling to a person
other than a housing authority or approved body duringthe charged period, the purchaser shall pay to the auth-ority or approved body, as appropriate, an amount calcu-lated in accordance with section 48(5) or(6);
(b) that the dwelling shall, during the charged period, unless
the housing authority or approved body, as appropriate,gives its prior written consent, be occupied as the normalplace of residence of the purchaser or of a member of thepurchaser ’s household;
(c) that the dwelling or any part thereof shall not, during the
charged period, without the prior written consent of thehousing authority or approved body, as the case may be,be sold, assigned, let or sublet or otherwise disposed of[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
or mortgaged, charged or alienated, otherwise than by
devise or operation of law;
(d) the purchaser shall not, during the charged period, without
the prior written consent of the housing authority orapproved body, as the case may be, make materialimprovements to the dwelling;
(e) terms and conditions relating to —
(i) maintenance of the dwelling by the purchaser, and
(ii) the provision and maintenance of adequate property
insurance by the purchaser in respect of the dwelling;
(f) such other terms and conditions relating to the sale of the
dwelling as may be prescribed for the purposes of atransfer order.
(3) Save as provided for by any other enactment or regulations
made thereunder, the sale of a dwelling to which this Part appliesunder an incremental purchase arrangement shall not imply any war-ranty on the part of the housing authority or approved body con-cerned in relation to the state of repair or condition of the dwellingor its fitness for human habitation.
(4) An approved body may, with the consent of the housing auth-
ority and subject to such regulations as may be made under section
49, reserve a number of dwellings for sale under this Part, being
dwellings provided with the assistance of a housing authority undersection 6 of the Act of 1992.
(5) Section 211(2) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and
section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 shall not apply to thesale of a dwelling to an eligible household under this section.
46.—(1) As soon as practicable after a dwelling to which this Part
applies is sold under an incremental purchase arrangement, the hous-ing authority or approved body, as appropriate, shall, subject to suchregulations as may be made under section 49 , shall make an order
(in this Part referred to as a “charging order ”), in the prescribed
form, charging the dwelling in the terms specified in this section forthe period specified in the order (in this Part referred to as the“charged period ”).
(2) The charging order shall create a charge in favour of the hous-
ing authority or approved body concerned in respect of an undividedpercentage share (in this Part referred to as the “charged share ”),
calculated in accordance with subsection (3) , in the dwelling which
charged share shall be reduced in accordance with subsection (4) .
(3) The charged share is calculated in accordance with the follow-
ing formula:
Y x 100
Z
where —
51Pt.3 S.45
Charging order.Pt.3 S.46
52[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(a) Y is the difference between the purchase price of the
dwelling at the time of sale to the purchaser and the pur-chase money, and
(b) Z is the purchase price of the dwelling at the time of sale
to the purchaser.
(4) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) and section 47 , the charged share
shall be reduced, in equal proportions (referred to in thissection as “incremental releases ”) applied annually, on
the anniversary of the date of the transfer order, inrespect of each complete year after that date duringwhich a purchaser or a member of his or her householdhas been in occupation of the dwelling as his or her nor-mal place of residence, until the earlier of —
(i) subject to section 48 , the first resale of the dwelling, or
(ii) subject to section 47 , the expiration of the charged
period.
(b) The reduction of the charged share for the period of 5
years from the date of the transfer order shall be cumu-lative and shall not apply until the expiration of thatperiod, provided the purchaser or a member of his or herhousehold has been in occupation of the dwelling as hisor her normal place of residence for that period.
(5) The housing authority or approved body, as the case may be,
shall, at any time where requested by the purchaser, give a statementin writing, in the prescribed form, to the purchaser indicating theaccumulated amount of incremental releases that have been appliedunder the charging order.
(6) A charging order shall be deemed to be a mortgage made by
deed within the meaning of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911 andto have been executed, at the time of the sale of the dwelling, infavour of the housing authority or approved body, as appropriate,for a charge in the terms provided for in this section.
(7) Accordingly, the housing authority or approved body shall, as
on and from the making of the charging order —
(a) be deemed to be a mortgagee of the dwelling for the pur-
poses of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911, and
(b) have, in relation to the charge referred to in subsection (6) ,
all the powers conferred by those Acts on mortgageesunder mortgages made by deed.
(8) Where a housing authority or an approved body makes a
charging order, it shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, cause theorder to be registered in the Registry of Deeds or the Land Registry,as appropriate, and it shall be a sufficient description of the chargein respect of which the order is being registered to state that chargeto be the charge referred to in section 46(2) of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 .
(9) A charging order affecting a dwelling which is registered land
within the meaning of the Registration of Title Act 1964 shall beregistrable as a burden affecting such land whether the person named[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
in the order as the owner of the land is or is not registered under the
said Act as the owner of the land.
(10) A housing authority or an approved body may, subject to
subsection (11) , enter into an agreement with a holder of a licence
under the Central Bank Act 1971, a building society or other finan-cial institution that a charge proposed to be created by it by acharging order shall have a priority, as against a mortgage or chargeproposed to be created in favour of that holder, society or institution,that is different from the priority the charge would otherwise have ifthis subsection had not been enacted.
(11) A housing authority or an approved body may only enter
into an agreement referred to in subsection (10) if it considers that
the agreement will —
(a) enable an eligible household to whom it is proposing to
sell a dwelling to which this Part applies under anincremental purchase arrangement to obtain an advanceof moneys from the holder, society or institution referredto in subsection (10) for the purposes of purchasing the
dwelling, or
(b) enable a purchaser —
(i) to refinance an existing advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(10),o r
(ii) to obtain a further advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(10), for any purpose.
(12) Any amount that becomes payable to a housing authority or
an approved body under section 47 or 48 may, without prejudice to
any other power in that behalf, be recovered by the authority orapproved body, as the case may be, from the person concerned as asimple contract debt in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(13) For the avoidance of doubt, neither a charging order nor a
charge that arises under it shall be regarded as a conveyance for thepurposes of section 3 of the Family Home Protection Act 1976.
(14) ( a) On the occurrence of the earlier of the events specified in
subsection(4)(a) and subject to the terms and conditions
of the transfer order and of the charging order havingbeen complied with, the housing authority or approvedbody, as the case may be, shall, where requested to do soby the purchaser, execute a deed of discharge in respectof the charging order.
(b) The housing authority or approved body, as the case may
be, shall be liable for any expenses incurred in theexecution and registration of a deed of discharge but shallnot otherwise be liable for any expenses incurred by apurchaser under this section or under section 47 or48.
47.—(1) A housing authority or approved body, as the case may
be, may suspend the reduction of the charged share provided forunder section 46 in respect of any year ending on the anniversary of
53Pt.3 S.46
Suspension of
reduction ofcharged share.Pt.3 S.47
54[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
the transfer order, where the purchaser fails to comply with any of
the terms and conditions of the transfer order.
(2) Where the housing authority or approved body suspends the
reduction of the charged share under subsection (1) , the charged
share on the dwelling shall be calculated in accordance with the fol-lowing formula:
Y x 100 —R
Z
where —
(a) Y is the difference between the purchase price of the
dwelling at the time of sale to the purchaser and the pur-chase money,
(b) Z is the purchase price of the dwelling at the time of sale
to the purchaser, and
(c) R is the portion of the charged share that has been
released in accordance with this subsection.
(3) ( a) Where a housing authority or approved body has sus-
pended the reduction of the charged share under subsec-
tion (1) , the housing authority or approved body, as
appropriate, shall, as soon as practicable thereafter,notify the purchaser in writing of the suspension and thereasons for the suspension.
(b) The housing authority or approved body, as the case may
be, shall, on the expiration of the charged period, give astatement to the purchaser in writing, in the prescribedform, indicating the amount of the charge outstandingunder the charging order on the date of expiration of thecharged period, which amount shall be expressed as apercentage of the market value of the dwelling, equiv-alent to the charged share of the housing authority orapproved body, as appropriate, in the dwelling on thatdate calculated in accordance with subsection (2) .
(4) ( a) The purchaser shall, within 2 months of receipt of the
statement referred to in subsection (3) , pay to the housing
authority the amount set out in the statement.
(b) Where the purchaser fails to pay the amount referred to
inparagraph (a) ,section 46(12) applies.
(5) For the purposes of this section, “market value ”means the
price for which a dwelling might reasonably be expected to be soldon the date of expiration of the charged period, in its existing stateof repair and condition and not subject to the conditions specified insection 45(2) or to a charging order.
(6) ( a) For the purposes of this section, the market value of a
dwelling shall be determined by the housing authority orapproved body, as appropriate, or, where the purchaser
does not agree with the market value so determined, byan independent valuer nominated by the purchaser froma panel of suitably qualified persons, established by the[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
housing authority, who are of a class or description pre-
scribed under section 49 .
(b) The housing authority or approved body shall not be liable
for any expenses incurred by the purchaser under para-
graph (a) .
48.—(1) Where a purchaser proposes to sell a dwelling which is
subject to a charging order which has not been discharged, he or sheshall give prior written notice to the housing authority or approvedbody, as appropriate, in accordance with the terms and conditionsspecified in the transfer order.
(2) Upon receipt of a notice referred to in subsection (1) , the
housing authority or approved body may, subject to subsection (4) ,
purchase the dwelling for a sum equivalent to its market value,reduced by an amount equal to that proportion of the market valueof the dwelling corresponding to the charged share in the dwellingon the date of resale.
(3) Without prejudice to any other power in that behalf, a housing
authority or an approved body, as appropriate, may refuse to consentto the sale to any person of the dwelling where the housing authorityor an approved body, as the case may be, is of the opinion that —
(a) the proposed sale price is less than the market value,
(b) the said person is or was engaged in anti-social behaviour
or the sale would not be in the interest of good estatemanagement, or
(c) the intended sale would, if completed, leave the vendor or
any person who might reasonably be expected to residewith him or her without adequate housing.
(4) Where the housing authority or approved body purchases the
dwelling in accordance with subsection (2) and material improve-
ments have been made to the dwelling with the prior written consentof the housing authority or approved body, as appropriate, in accord-ance with the terms and conditions of the transfer order, the pricepayable by the authority or approved body shall be the market valueof the dwelling, reduced by an amount equal to that proportion ofthe net market value of the dwelling as corresponds to the chargedshare of the authority or approved body in the dwelling on the dateof its resale.
(5) Where a purchaser resells a dwelling to a person other than a
housing authority or an approved body during the charged period,the purchaser shall pay to the housing authority or approved bodyconcerned an amount equal to a percentage of the market value,such percentage being the equivalent of the charged share of theauthority or approved body in the dwelling on the date of resale ofthe dwelling.
(6) Where a purchaser resells a dwelling to which material
improvements have been made with the prior written consent of theauthority or approved body, as appropriate, to a person other thana housing authority or an approved body, the purchaser shall pay tothe housing authority or approved body an amount equal to thatproportion of the net market value of the dwelling as corresponds to
55Pt.3 S.47
Control on resale of
dwelling sold underan incrementalpurchasearrangement.Pt.3 S.48
Regulations
(Part 3 ).
56[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
the charged share of the authority or approved body in the dwelling
on the date of its resale.
(7) Where the amount payable under any of the provisions of this
section would reduce the proceeds of the sale (disregarding solicitorand estate agent ’s costs and fees) below the purchase money, the
amount payable under the charging order shall be reduced to theextent necessary to avoid that result.
(8) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , where a purchaser resells a
dwelling which is subject to a charging order the chargedperiod of which has expired and in respect of which theamount referred to in section 47(3) has not been paid in
accordance with that section, section 46(12) applies.
(b) No account shall be taken of any material improvements
made to the dwelling after the expiration of the chargedperiod.
(9) The housing authority may take account of any moneys likely
to accrue to an approved body from the sale of dwellings underincremental purchase arrangements when providing assistance tosuch a body under section 6 of the Act of 1992 in respect of theprovision of housing accommodation.
(10) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , any moneys accruing to an
approved body from the sale of a dwelling under anincremental purchase arrangement or the resale of sucha dwelling shall be paid to the housing authority for useby the housing authority for the purposes specified insection 13 .
(b) Repayment of the moneys referred to in paragraph (a)
shall be limited to the extent that those moneys havebeen taken into account by the housing authority whenproviding assistance under section 6 of the Act of 1992 inrespect of the provision of housing accommodation.
(11) For the purposes of this section, the current market value of
a dwelling shall be determined by the housing authority or theapproved body, as appropriate, or, where the vendor does not agreewith the market value so determined, by an independent valuernominated by the vendor from a panel of suitably qualified persons,established by the housing authority, who are of a class or descriptionprescribed under section 49 .
(12) The housing authority or approved body, as the case may
be, shall not be liable for any expenses incurred by a vendor undersubsection (11) .
49.—The Minister may make regulations in relation to all or any
one or more of the following:
(a) the class or classes of dwelling to which incremental pur-
chase arrangements may apply;
(b) the class of classes of households with whom incremental
purchase arrangements may be entered into;
(c) the method for determining the purchase price of a dwell-
ing which method may —[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(i) differentiate between different classes of dwelling,
and
(ii) take account of the age of the dwelling;
(d) the method for determining the purchase money taking
account of the financial circumstances of households withwhom incremental purchase arrangements may beentered into;
(e) the determination of the minimum period, or the range
within which a housing authority shall fix the minimumperiod, for which a charging order shall apply in respectof a dwelling sold under an incremental purchasearrangement, which period shall not in any case be lessthan 20 years from the date of the transfer order;
(f) in the case of an approved body, the reservation by it of
a specified number or proportion of newly-constructeddwellings provided with the assistance of a housing auth-ority under section 6 of the Act of 1992;
(g) the form and manner of, and terms and conditions to be
specified in, a transfer order and a charging order;
(h) the class or classes or description of persons who are suit-
ably qualified by reference to their qualifications andexperience to determine the market value of a dwellingor site, as the case may be, for the purposes of this Part;
(i) the form of the statement for the purposes of sections
46(5) and 47(3) ;
(j) such other matters as the Minister considers necessary and
appropriate relating to incremental purchasearrangements.
PART 4
TENANT PURCHASE OF APARTMENTS
50.—(1) In this Part —
“apartment ”means a separate and self-contained dwelling in an
apartment complex which requires arrangements for the upkeep andmanagement of all or any part of the common areas, structures,works or services other than by the owner of the apartment;
“apartment assignment order ”has the meaning given to it by
section 64(2) ;
“apartment complex ”means land on which there stands erected a
building or buildings, comprising or together comprising not less than5 apartments (but not including any community apartment) and thecommon areas, structures, works and services;
“apartment complex service charge ”has the meaning given to it by
section 67(1) and “service charge ”shall be construed accordingly;
57Pt.3 S.49
Interpretation ( Part
4).Pt.4 S.50
58[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
“apartment complex support fund ”has the meaning given to it by
section 70 ;
“apartment complex transfer order ”has the meaning given to it by
section 59 ;
“apartment owner ”, in relation to an apartment (including a com-
munity apartment) in a designated apartment complex, means, sub-ject to section 65(1)(b) —
(a) an apartment purchaser, or
(b) the housing authority, in the case of an apartment which
has not been sold by the housing authority —
(i) under section 90 of the Principal Act, whether before
or after the coming into operation of this Part, or
(ii) under this Part and any regulations made thereunder;
“apartment purchaser ”means, subject to section 76 , a person who
purchases an apartment under this Part and includes a person inwhom there subsequently becomes vested the interest of the apart-ment purchaser or his or her successor in title and the personal rep-resentative of that person or successor in title and references to“purchaser ”shall be construed accordingly;
“apartment transfer order ”has the meaning given to it by section 60 ;
“charging order ”has the meaning given to it by section 74 ;
“charged period ”has the meaning given to it by section 74 ;
“charged share ”has the meaning given to it by section 74 ;
“common areas, structures, works and services ”means, in relation
to an apartment complex, areas, structures, works and services thatare, or are intended to be, common to apartments (including com-munity apartments) in the apartment complex and enjoyed there-with, including where relevant access and side roads, architecturalfeatures, circulation areas, footpaths, internal common stairways,open spaces, parking areas, utility rooms and that portion of the roofor exterior of any building not intended to form or not forming partof any individual apartment;
“community apartment ”means an apartment in an apartment com-
plex that is authorised by the housing authority to be used for activi-ties for the common benefit or enjoyment of the occupiers of apart-ments in the apartment complex;
“current market value ”means the price for which an apartment
might reasonably be expected to be sold, on the open market, on thedate of sale under section 76 , in its existing state of repair and con-
dition and not subject to the conditions specified in section 64(5) or
to a charging order;
“designated apartment complex ”has the meaning given to it by
section 55(1) ;
“financial year ”, in relation to a management company, means a
period of 12 months ending on 31 December in any year, and, in thecase of the first financial year of a management company, means the[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
period commencing on the expiry of the period specified in section
63(1) and ending on 31 December next following;
“initial selling period ”has the meaning given to it by section 56(2) ;
“management company ”has the meaning given to it by section 57(2) ;
“management company annual charges ”has the meaning given to it
bysection 69 ;
“member ”means a member of the management company;
“property management services ”means services in respect of the
management of an apartment complex carried out on behalf of amanagement company, and such services include —
(a) administrative services, and
(b) the procurement of or any combination of the mainten-
ance, servicing, repair, improvement or insurance of theapartment complex or any part or parts of the apart-ment complex;
“purchase money ”, in relation to an apartment, means the monetary
value of the proportion of the purchase price of the apartment fixedby the housing authority, in accordance with regulations made undersection 77 for the purposes of calculating the purchase money, as the
proportion that is required to be paid to purchase the apartment;
“purchase price ”, in relation to an apartment, means the price of
the apartment determined by a housing authority in accordance withregulations made under section 77 for the purposes of calculating the
purchase price;
“section 53 proposal ”has the meaning given to it by section 53 ;
“sell”, in relation to an apartment, means to sell or assign a leasehold
estate or interest;
“sinking fund ”has the meaning given to it by section 68(1) ;
“sinking fund contribution ”has the meaning given to it by section
68(3) ;
“tenant ”means the tenant of an apartment pursuant to a tenancy
agreement between the household and a housing authority.
(2) Save where otherwise provided for by this Part —
(a) references in this Part to an apartment, shall not include a
community apartment, and
(b) references in this Part to a tenant, shall not include any
tenant of a community apartment.
(3) In this Part, save where the context otherwise requires, a refer-
ence to a transfer of ownership shall be construed as a reference toa deed of transfer, conveyance or assignment.
59Pt.4 S.50Pt.4
Consideration of
designation ofapartment complex.
60[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
51.—(1) Subject to and in accordance with this Part and any regu-
lations made thereunder, a housing authority may propose to desig-nate an apartment complex for the purpose of making all of theapartments comprised therein, in respect of which the housing auth-ority is the apartment owner, available for sale to the tenants thereof,under this Part and any regulations made thereunder, where thehousing authority is satisfied that the conditions specified in subsec-
tion (2) are met.
(2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) are that —
(a) the housing authority considers that the sale of the apart-
ments concerned is consistent with good estate manage-ment and management of its overall dwelling stock inaccordance with the policy objectives set out in its hous-ing services plan relating to the management and main-tenance of dwellings owned by the housing authority,
(b) the apartment complex is suitable for designation having
regard to, but not necessarily limited to, the following —
(i) the configuration of the apartment complex by refer-
ence to its design and layout and to the commonareas, structures, works and services,
(ii) the annual cost of managing and maintaining the
apartment complex and providing for future capitalworks to preserve and improve the apartment com-plex, and
(iii) the number of apartments available for sale,
(c) the housing authority is satisfied, in a case where structural
work has been carried out on the apartment complexwithin the previous 10 years or, in any other case, wherea survey of the structural condition of the apartment com-plex has been carried out within the previous 5 years, thatthe apartment complex is in good structural condition,order and repair,
(d) with respect to the apartment complex concerned, neither
the housing services plan nor the housing action prog-ramme contain —
(i) proposals to carry out reconstruction or improvement
works by virtue of section 12 of the Act of 1988, or
(ii) plans for the regeneration of the area in which the
apartment complex is situated,
(e) good and marketable title may be transferred to a manage-
ment company under section 59 for the purposes of this
Part, and
(f) none of the apartments in the apartment complex is of a
class excluded from sale under this Part by regulationsmade under section 77 .[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
52.—(1) Where a housing authority proposes to designate an
apartment complex, the housing authority shall prepare a draft pro-posal, which shall —
(a) specify the apartment complex which it is proposed to
designate,
(b) include information relating to the arrangements for —
(i) holding a tenant plebiscite in respect of the proposed
designation of the apartment complex within 3months of the adoption by the housing authority ofasection 53 proposal,
(ii) transferring ownership of the apartment complex to a
management company,
(iii) the sale of apartments in the apartment complex to
the tenants of those apartments,
(iv) managing and maintaining the common areas, struc-
tures, works and services in the apartment complex,and
(v) funding expenditure of a type referred to in section
68(1) ,
(c) include information relating to the terms and conditions
of sale of an apartment in the apartment complex to thetenant thereof, including —
(i) the obligation to pay the management company
annual charges and the estimated level thereof in thefirst year after purchase,
(ii) the restrictions on resale of an apartment by an apart-
ment purchaser, and
(iii) the covenants in the apartment assignment order and
the consequences for the apartment purchaser offailure to observe same,
(d) include information relating to the performance by the
housing authority of its functions in respect of apartmentsin the apartment complex the subject of tenancy agree-ments between the housing authority and the tenantsthereof,
(e) set out indicative figures for the projected purchase price
and purchase money for the different classes of apart-ment in the apartment complex, and
(f) include any other information that the authority considers
relevant to the draft proposal.
(2) The housing authority shall —
(a) publish and maintain on the Internet a copy of a draft
proposal under this section to designate an apartmentcomplex,
61Pt.4
Preparation of draft
proposal todesignate apartmentcomplex.Pt.4 S.52
Proposal to
designate apartmentcomplex.
62[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) make the draft proposal available for inspection on
request by any person, without charge, at its offices andsuch other places as it considers appropriate during nor-mal office hours,
(c) give notice of the draft proposal to —
(i) each tenant of an apartment in the apartment com-
plex, and
(ii) each member of the housing authority.
(3) A housing authority shall take such steps as it considers appro-
priate for the purposes of informing tenants and seeking their viewsabout a draft proposal under this section to designate an apartmentcomplex including but not limited to —
(a) the holding of an information meeting or meetings about
the draft proposal, and
(b) arranging to meet with individual tenants, as appropriate,
on request, regarding the draft proposal.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a) , the draft proposal may
include a map that clearly indicates the boundaries, common areas,structures, works and services of the apartment complex concerned.
53.—(1) Where, subject to the conditions specified in section 51(2)
continuing to be satisfied and having regard to the views of the ten-ants concerned expressed at information meetings or otherwiseunder section 52(3) , the manager decides to proceed with the pro-
posal to designate the apartment complex, the manager shall submitthe draft proposal to the members of the housing authority with orwithout such modifications as the manager considers appropriate.
(2) Where the manager decides not to proceed with the proposal
to designate an apartment complex —
(a) because any condition specified in section 51(2) is no
longer satisfied,
(b) having regard to the views of the tenants concerned
expressed at information meetings or otherwise undersection 52(3) ,o r
(c) for any other reason,
the manager shall advise the tenants concerned and the members
of the housing authority of his or her decision and the reasons forthat decision.
(3) The housing authority may, with or without modification,
adopt the draft proposal, submitted to it under subsection (1) ,t o
designate the apartment complex (in this Part referred to as a “sec-
tion 53 proposal ”).
(4) The adoption under this section of a section 53 proposal is a
reserved function.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
54.—(1) Where a housing authority adopts a section 53 proposal,
it shall hold a tenant plebiscite in respect of the apartment complexconcerned within the period specified in the proposal and in accord-ance with this section and any regulations made thereunder for thepurpose of ascertaining the level of —
(a) support for the designation of the apartment complex, and
(b) willingness of tenants who purchase apartments in the
apartment complex under this Part to serve as directorsof the management company.
(2) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , each apartment in the apartment
complex concerned shall be afforded one vote in theplebiscite.
(b) Where an apartment has been sold by the housing auth-
ority under section 90 of the Principal Act, whetherbefore or after the coming into operation of this Part, theapartment shall not be included for the purposes of atenant plebiscite under this section.
(3) A vote under subsection (2) may only be exercised —
(a) by the tenant of the apartment at the time of the plebi-
scite, and
(b) by completing and returning a ballot paper in the form
and manner prescribed under subsection (6) .
(4) In the case of an apartment where there are 2 or more
tenants —
(a) they shall be considered as one tenant for the purposes of
subsection (3)(a) ,
(b) they are not entitled to vote in the plebiscite unless a
majority of them concurs, and
(c) unless the vote is signed by a majority of them, it shall be
disregarded for the purposes of the plebiscite.
(5) Not later than 2 months after the adoption of the proposal to
designate the apartment complex, the housing authority shall sendto the tenants concerned, by ordinary post or any other means thatmay be prescribed under subsection (6) , all ballot papers for com-
pletion under subsection (3) together with a copy of the section 53
proposal and any other explanatory material it considers relevant.
(6) The Minister may make regulations —
(a) relating to and governing the conduct of a tenant
plebiscite,
(b) prescribing the form of a ballot paper under this section
and the manner in which it is to be completed andreturned, and
(c) prescribing means other than post for the delivery and
return of ballot papers under this section.
63Pt.4
Tenant plebiscite.Pt.4
Designation of
apartment complex.
64[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
55.—(1) Where, following the holding of a tenant plebiscite, the
conditions specified in section 51(2) continue to be met, and subject
to the conditions specified in subsection (2) being satisfied, the hous-
ing authority may designate the apartment complex (in this Partreferred to as a “designated apartment complex ”) in accordance with
thesection 53 proposal.
(2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) are that —
(a) the number of votes in favour of the designation of the
apartment complex equals or exceeds 65 per cent of thenumber of tenants entitled to vote at the plebiscite, and
(b) the number of voters who indicate at the plebiscite that, if
designation proceeds and they purchase their apartments,they are willing to serve as directors of the managementcompany equals or exceeds the greater of —
(i) the minimum number of tenants specified in column
(2)of the Table to this subsection opposite the entry
incolumn (1) of the class of apartment complex cor-
responding to the class of the apartment complexconcerned, or
(ii) the number (rounded up to the nearest higher whole
number) of tenants represented by the minimumproportion of all tenants specified in column (3) of
the said Table opposite the said entry in column (1) .
TABLE
Class of apartment Minimum number of Minimum proportion of all
complex determined tenants in apartment tenants in apartment complex
by the number of complex willing to willing to serve as directors of
apartments comprised serve as directors of management company
therein of which the management company (3)
housing authority is (2)
the apartment owner
(1)
Apartment complex
comprising not more 3 60%
than 9 apartments
Apartment complex
comprising 10 to 19 6 40%
apartments
Apartment complex
comprising 20 to 29 8 None
apartments
Apartment complex
comprising 30 to 59 9 None
apartments
Apartment complex
comprising 60 10 None
apartments or more
(3) Where an apartment complex is designated under subsection
(1), the designation lapses if no apartment is sold by the housing
authority under this Part before the expiry of the initial sellingperiod.
(4) The designation of an apartment complex is a reserved
function.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
56.—(1) A housing authority shall, within 6 months of designating
an apartment complex under section 55 , by written notice given to
each tenant of an apartment in the apartment complex, invite him orher to submit to the authority an application to purchase theapartment.
(2) Apartments in a designated apartment complex shall be avail-
able for sale under this Part to the tenants thereof during the period(in this Part referred to as the “initial selling period ”) beginning on
the date specified in subsection (3) and ending on the later of the
following —
(a) 3 years from the date on which the initial selling period
begins, or
(b) 5 years from the date on which the initial selling period
begins in a case where the housing authority, before theexpiry of the period specified in paragraph (a) , extends
that period for a further period of 2 years where it issatisfied that the sales of at least the minimum number ofapartments available for sale in the designated apartmentcomplex, calculated in accordance with section 64(4) , will
proceed during any such extended period.
(3) The specified date for the purposes of subsection (2) is the
date of the first occasion following designation of the apartmentcomplex under section 55 on which the housing authority, pursuant
to an application referred to in subsection (1) , provides to a tenant
the necessary information, documentation, particulars of title andterms and conditions of sale relating to the apartment concernedtogether with information and documentation relating to the man-agement company.
(4) The extension of the initial selling period for the purposes of
subsection (2)(b) is a reserved function.
(5) The manager shall arrange for the establishment of a manage-
ment company under section 57 where the manager is satisfied that —
(a) the sales are ready to proceed, during the initial selling
period, of at least the minimum number of apartmentsavailable for sale in the designated apartment complexcalculated in accordance with s ubsection (6) , and
(b) in relation to those sales that are ready to proceed as
referred to in paragraph (a) , the number of tenants of the
apartments concerned that have indicated their willing-ness to serve as directors of the management companyequals or exceeds half of the minimum number of apart-ments calculated in accordance with subsection (6) .
(6) The minimum number of apartments for the purposes of sub-
section (5)(a) is calculated as the greater of —
(a) the minimum number of apartments specified in column
(2)of the Table to this subsection opposite the entry in
column (1) of the class of apartment complex correspond-
ing to the class of the designated apartment complex con-cerned, and
(b) the minimum number (rounded up to the nearest higher
whole number) of tenants represented by the minimum
65Pt.4
Initial selling
period.Pt.4 S.56
Establishment and
objects ofmanagementcompany.
66[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
proportion of all apartments in the designated apartment
complex concerned specified in column (3) of the said
Table opposite the said entry in column (1) .
TABLE
Class of apartment Minimum number of Minimum proportion of all
complex determined apartment sales apartments in apartment
by the number of (2) complex
apartments comprised (3)
therein of which the
housing authority is
the apartment owner
(1)
Apartment complex
comprising not more 2 35%
than 19 apartments
Apartment complex
comprising 20 or more 7 30%
apartments
(7) For the purposes of subsection (5) and section 64(3) , a sale is
ready to proceed where, in accordance with the terms and conditionsof sale, the tenant has —
(a) signed the apartment assignment order,
(b) paid such deposit as is payable to the housing authority in
respect of the purchase concerned, and
(c) provided to the housing authority written notice of loan
approval or otherwise established, to the satisfaction ofthe housing authority, his or her capacity to pay thebalance of the purchase money on the completion of thesale to him or her.
57.—(1) In this section references to an apartment include a com-
munity apartment.
(2) A housing authority shall, in relation to a designated apart-
ment complex, establish a company (in this Part referred to as a“management company ”) to achieve the principal objects specified
insubsections (5) and(6)which shall be a company formed and regis-
tered under the Companies Acts and limited by —
(a) shares, where there are not more than 6 apartments in the
designated apartment complex concerned, or
(b) guarantee, where there are more than 6 apartments in the
designated apartment complex.
(3) The name of every management company shall be comprised
of the name of the designated apartment complex concerned and thewords “owners ’management company ”which words may be
abbreviated to “OMC ”.
(4) The memorandum and articles of association of a manage-
ment company shall be in such form consistent with this Act as maybe determined by the housing authority.
(5) The principal objects of a management company shall be
stated in its memorandum of association to be as follows:[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(a) to take a transfer of ownership of a designated apartment
complex in accordance with an apartment complextransfer order;
(b) in the case of apartments in the designated apartment
complex which have not been sold by the housing auth-ority under section 90 of the Principal Act, whetherbefore or after the coming into operation of this Part, togrant a lease or sublease of the apartments to the housingauthority in accordance with an apartment transfer order;
(c) to manage, control and maintain the common areas, struc-
tures, works and services in accordance with section
63(3) ;
(d) to carry out its functions in accordance with this Part.
(6) Subsection (5) does not prevent or restrict the inclusion of
objects and powers that are —
(a) reasonably necessary, proper for or incidental or ancillary
to attaining the principal objects referred to in subsection
(5), and
(b) not inconsistent with this Part or any other enactment.
(7) The articles of association shall include provision for —
(a) the levying and collection annually of an apartment com-
plex service charge and a charge in respect of the sinkingfund contribution, and
(b) the covenants and agreements relating to the designated
apartment complex and the apartments comprisedtherein.
58.—(1) A management company shall —
(a) prepare and furnish to each member an annual report
which complies with subsection (2) , and
(b) hold a meeting at least once in each year for purposes
which include the consideration of the annual reportreferred to in paragraph (a) .
(2) An annual report of a management company shall include:
(a) a statement of income and expenditure relating to the
period covered by the report;
(b) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the company;
(c) a statement of the funds standing to the credit of the sink-
ing fund;
(d) a statement of the amount of the apartment complex
service charge and the basis of such charge in respect ofthe period covered by the report;
(e) a statement of the projected or agreed apartment complex
service charge relating to the current period;
67Pt.4 S.57
Annual meetings
and reports ofmanagementcompany.Pt.4 S.58
Transfer of
ownership ofdesignatedapartment complexto managementcompany.
68[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(f) a statement of any planned expenditure on refurbishment,
improvement or maintenance of a non-recurring naturewhich it is intended to carry out in the current period;
(g) a statement of the insured value of the designated apart-
ment complex, the amount of the premium charged, thename of the insurance company with which the policy ofinsurance is held and a summary of the principal riskscovered; and
(h) a statement fully disclosing any contracts entered into or
in force between the management company and a direc-tor or shadow director of the company or a person whois a connected person as respects that director orshadow director.
(3) At least 21 days written notice of the meeting referred to in
subsection (1)(b) shall be given to each member.
(4) A copy of the annual report referred to in subsection (1)(a)
shall be given to each member at least 10 days before the meetingreferred to in subsection (1)(b) .
(5) The meeting referred to in subsection (1)(b) shall take place
within reasonable proximity to the designated apartment complexand at a reasonable time (unless otherwise agreed by 75 per centmajority vote of the members).
(6) The obligations of a management company under this section
are in addition to any other obligation or duty of such companywhether arising under an Act, statutory instrument, by rule of lawor otherwise.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (2)(h) ,“shadow director ”and
“connected person ”have the same meanings as they have in the
Companies Acts.
59.—(1) As soon as practicable after the establishment of the
management company under section 57 the housing authority shall,
for nominal consideration transfer its ownership of the apartmentcomplex (including its interest in any apartment sold under section90 of the Principal Act whether before or after the coming into oper-ation of this Part) to the management company by means of an order(in this Part referred to as an “apartment complex transfer order ”),
in the prescribed form, made by the housing authority, which ordershall be expressed and shall operate to vest, on the date specified inthe order, the interest specified therein, subject as therein providedand to the terms and conditions specified in subsection (2) .
(2) The terms and conditions referred to in subsection (1) include
the following —
(a) that the management company shall, on the date specified
in the apartment complex transfer order or as soon aspracticable thereafter, lease or sublease, as the case maybe, each apartment (including any community apartment)in the designated apartment complex to the housing auth-ority in accordance with this Part other than any apart-ments sold by the housing authority under section 90 ofthe Principal Act whether before or after the coming intooperation of this Part,[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) that the transfer of ownership under subsection (1) is sub-
ject to —
(i) the tenancy agreements between the housing auth-
ority and the tenants of the apartments concernedentered into before the date of the apartment com-plex transfer order, and
(ii) any lease entered into between the housing authority
before the date of the apartment complex transferorder for the purpose of the sale of an apartment inthe designated apartment complex under section 90of the Principal Act whether before or after the com-ing into operation of this Part,
(c) that the consent of the management company shall not be
required in respect of the sale or letting of apartmentsby the housing authority under the Housing Acts 1966
to 2009 ,
(d) that the management company shall, where the desig-
nation of an apartment complex lapses under section
55(3) , comply with the requirements of section 61 ,
(e) such other terms and conditions as may be prescribed for
the purposes of an apartment complex transfer order.
(3) Save as provided for by any other enactment or regulations
made thereunder, the transfer of ownership of a designated apart-ment complex to a management company under this section shall notimply any warranty on the part of the housing authority in relation tothe state of repair or condition of the apartment complex or thefitness for human habitation of the apartments concerned.
60.—(1) In this section, in the case of a designated apartment
complex in respect of which a leasehold interest is assigned to themanagement company for the purposes of section 59, a reference to
a lease includes a sublease.
(2) Subject to and in accordance with this section, as soon as prac-
ticable after the date specified in the apartment complex transferorder for the purposes of section 59(1) , the management company
shall, for nominal consideration, grant a lease to the housing auth-ority in respect of each apartment (including any communityapartment) in the designated apartment complex, by means of anorder (in this Part referred to as an “apartment transfer order ”)i n
the prescribed form, made by the management company, which shallbe expressed and shall operate to vest, on the date specified in theorder, the interest specified therein, subject as therein provided and
to the terms and conditions specified in subsection (3) .
(3) The terms and conditions referred to in subsection (2) include
the following —
(a) that the housing authority may, without the consent of the
management company —
(i) sell the apartment, under this Part, to a tenant
thereof, or
69Pt.4 S.59
Lease of apartment
to housingauthority.Pt.4 S.60
Consequences of
designation lapsingunder section 55 .
70[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(ii) without prejudice to any tenancy agreement entered
into between the housing authority and a tenant ofthe apartment concerned before the date specifiedin the apartment transfer order for the purposes ofsubsection (2) , let the apartment in accordance with
and in the performance of its functions under theHousing Acts 1966 to 2009 ,
(b) that the housing authority shall not, without the prior writ-
ten consent of the management company make materialimprovements to the apartment,
(c) the condition specified in section 69(3) relating to payment
of the management company annual charges in respectof the apartment and the consequences of failing to pay,
(d) that the management company shall, where the desig-
nation of an apartment complex lapses under section
55(3) , comply with the requirements of section 61 ,
(e) terms and conditions relating to membership of the man-
agement company, and
(f) such other terms and conditions relating to the lease of an
apartment to the housing authority under this section asmay be prescribed for the purposes of an apartmenttransfer order.
(4) This section does not apply to any apartment in a designated
apartment complex sold by a housing authority under section 90 ofthe Principal Act whether before or after the coming into operationof this Part.
(5) In this section “material improvements ”means improvements
made to an apartment whether for the purposes of extending, enlarg-ing or converting the apartment but does not include internal decor-ation and repair.
61.—(1) Where the designation of an apartment complex lapses
under section 55(3) , the housing authority shall notify the manage-
ment company in writing and the management company shall, assoon as practicable after receipt of the notification —
(a) terminate the leases granted to the housing authority in
respect of each apartment in accordance with the termsand conditions of the apartment complex transfer orderand the apartment transfer order;
(b) transfer ownership of the apartment complex to the hous-
ing authority, subject to any lease referred to in section
59(2)(b)(ii) , and
(c) arrange for the winding up of the management company
in accordance with the Companies Acts.
(2) Where the designation of an apartment complex lapses under
section 55(3) and subject to compliance by the management company
with the requirements of subsection (1) , the housing authority shall
continue to perform its functions under the Housing Acts 1966 to
2009 relating to the management and control of the apartment
complex.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
62.—A housing authority shall reimburse a management company
established by it in respect of such reasonable and vouched expensesas may be incurred by the management company in the performanceof its functions under sections 59, 60 and 61.
63.—(1) Notwithstanding the transfer of ownership of a desig-
nated apartment complex to a management company under section
59, the housing authority shall manage and control the designated
apartment complex in the performance of its functions under theHousing Acts 1966 to 2009 , for the period beginning on the date
specified in the apartment complex transfer order for the purposesofsection 59(1) and ending on the date of the first sale of an apart-
ment in the apartment complex to the tenant thereof.
(2) The management company shall pay to the housing authority
as soon as practicable after receipt thereof any charges paid to themanagement company in respect of the period specified in subsection
(1)by any person to whom an apartment in the designated apartment
complex was sold under section 90 of the Principal Act whetherbefore or after the coming into operation of this Part.
(3) On the date of the first sale under this Part of an apartment
in a designated apartment complex to the tenant thereof the manage-ment company shall, in relation to the common areas, structures,works and services in the designated apartment complex, in accord-ance with its memorandum and articles of association ensure theeffective management and maintenance of the common areas, struc-tures, works and services, and without prejudice to the generality ofthe foregoing, ensure that the designated apartment complex func-tions effectively and otherwise comply with the obligations imposedon the management company under and in accordance with this Partand the apartment complex transfer order.
64.—(1) In this section, in the case of an apartment in respect of
which a sublease is granted to the housing authority for the purposesofsection 60 , a reference to a lease includes a sublease.
(2) Subject to and in accordance with this Part and the Housing
Acts 1966 to 2004 and subject to such regulations as may be madeunder section 77 , a housing authority may, subject to subsections (3)
and (4), in consideration of the receipt by the housing authority of
the purchase money, sell an apartment, of which it is the apartmentowner, in a designated apartment complex, in the state of repair andcondition existing on the date of sale, to the tenant of the apartment(in this Part referred to as an “apartment purchaser ”) by assignment
of the lease granted to the housing authority under section 60 by
means of an order (in this Part referred to as an “apartment assign-
ment order ”), in the prescribed form, made by the housing authority,
which shall be expressed and shall operate to vest, on the date speci-fied in the order, the interest specified in the order, in accordancewith and subject to the terms and conditions specified in subsection
(5)and the terms and conditions of a charging order.
(3) The manager shall not sign the apartment assignment order
for the sale to a tenant under this Part of the first apartment in adesignated apartment complex where —
(a) the initial selling period has expired, or
71Pt.4
Costs incurred by
managementcompany.
Management,
control andmaintenance ofdesignatedapartment complex.
Sale by housing
authority ofapartments totenants.Pt.4 S.64
72[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) he or she is not satisfied that the sales are ready to proceed
(within the meaning of section 56(7) ) within 4 weeks of
the date of signing the assignment order of at least theminimum number of apartments available for sale in thedesignated apartment complex, calculated in accordancewith subsection (4) ,o r
(c) the number of tenants of the apartments referred to in
paragraph (b) who have indicated a willingness to serve
as directors of the management company is less than halfof the minimum number of apartments calculated inaccordance with subsection (4) .
(4) The minimum number of apartments for the purposes of sub-
section (3)(b) includes the first apartment referred to in subsection
(3)and is calculated as the greater of —
(a) the minimum number of apartments specified in column
(2)of the following Table opposite the entry in column
(1)of the class of apartment complex corresponding to
the class of the designated apartment complex con-cerned, or
(b) the minimum number (rounded up to the nearest higher
whole number) of tenants represented by the minimumproportion of all apartments specified in column (3) of
the following Table opposite the said entry in column (1) .
TABLE
Class of apartment Minimum number of Minimum proportion of all
complex determined apartment sales apartments in apartment
by the number of (2) complex
apartments comprised (3)
therein of which the
housing authority is
the apartment owner
(1)
Apartment complex
comprising not more 2 30%
than 19 apartments
Apartment complex
comprising 20 or more 6 25%
apartments
(5) The terms and conditions referred to in subsection (2) shall
include the following —
(a) that the apartment shall, during the charged period, unless
the housing authority gives its prior written consent, beoccupied as the normal place of residence of the apart-ment purchaser or of a member of the apartment pur-chaser ’s household;
(b) that the apartment or any part thereof shall not, during
the charged period without the prior written consent ofthe housing authority, be sold, assigned, let or sublet orotherwise disposed of or mortgaged, charged or alien-ated, otherwise than by devise or operation of law;
(c) terms and conditions relating to the resale of the apart-
ment under section 76 during the charged period;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(d) such other terms and conditions relating to the sale of an
apartment as may be prescribed for the purposes of anapartment assignment order.
(6) A tenant who applies to purchase his or her apartment under
this Part shall, on or before signing the apartment assignment order,pay to the housing authority a deposit of an amount determined inaccordance with such method as may be prescribed under section 77
which deposit, subject to subsection (7) , shall not be refundable if
the tenant withdraws from the sale for any reason at any time beforethe expiration of 6 months from the date on which he or she signsthe order.
(7) Where a housing authority does not proceed with the sale of
an apartment for any reason, the housing authority shall —
(a) notify the tenant in writing,
(b) refund any deposit paid by the tenant and reimburse the
tenant in respect of such reasonable legal expenses asmay be incurred by him or her in respect of the proposedpurchase of the apartment by him or her under thisPart, and
(c) pay to the tenant interest on the amount of the deposit
refunded under paragraph (b) at the rate prescribed
under section 33 for the period beginning on the date the
tenant signed the apartment assignment order and endingon the date on which the housing authority notifies thetenant that it is not proceeding with the purchase.
(8) Save as provided for by any other enactment or regulations
made thereunder, the sale of an apartment under this Part to a tenantshall not imply any warranty on the part of the housing authority inrelation to the state of repair or condition of the apartment or itsfitness for human habitation.
(9) A housing authority shall not proceed with the sale of an
apartment under this Part to the tenant thereof —
(a) where —
(i) at any time during the 3 years immediately before
applying to the authority to purchase an apartmentunder this Part, the tenant was in arrears of rent foran accumulated period of 12 weeks or more inrespect of the apartment or any other dwelling orsite let to him or her by any housing authority undertheHousing Acts 1966 to 2009 or provided under
Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000,and
(ii) the housing authority has not entered into an arrange-
ment under section 34 with the tenant for the pay-
ment of the moneys due and owing to the housingauthority in respect of those arrears,
(b) where, on the basis of any structural survey of the apart-
ment complex or of an individual apartment that may becarried out after the date of the designation of the apart-ment complex under section 55 , the authority considers
73Pt.4 S.64Pt.4 S.64
Management
company provisions.
74[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
that it is not in the interest of good estate management
to proceed with the sale,
(c) where the authority is not satisfied, having regard to the
provisions of section 65(5) , that the number of existing
and prospective apartment purchasers willing to serve asdirectors of the management company is sufficient toenable the company to function effectively, or
(d) where the designation of the apartment complex for tenant
purchase has lapsed under section 55(3) .
(10) Section 211(2) of the Planning and Development Act 2000
and section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 shall not applyto the sale of an apartment to a tenant in accordance with this Part.
65.—(1) In this section —
(a) references to an apartment include a community apart-
ment, and
(b) references to an apartment owner include —
(i) a person to whom an apartment in a designated apart-
ment complex was sold under section 90 of the Prin-cipal Act whether before or after the coming intooperation of this Part, and
(ii) a person in whom there subsequently becomes vested
the interest of the person referred to in subpara-
graph (i) or his or her successor in title and the per-
sonal representative of that person or successor intitle.
(2) Each apartment owner shall be a member of the manage-
ment company.
(3) ( a) The voting rights of the members shall be structured in
such a manner that in the determination of any matter bythe members one vote shall attach to each apartmentowner in respect of each apartment in the designatedapartment complex to which the management companyrelates, and that no other person has such a vote.
(b) Each vote referred to in paragraph (a) shall be of equal
value.
(4) Where 2 or more persons are joint apartment owners they
shall constitute one member in respect of the exercise of the votingand other powers vested in such member.
(5) According as apartments in a designated apartment complex
are sold to tenants under this Part, a housing authority shall, subjecttosubsection (6) , nominate for election as directors of the manage-
ment company such number of persons which, when expressed as aproportion of the total number of directors of the company that willbe serving after the election is concluded, does not exceed the pro-portion of the total number of apartments in the designated apart-ment complex of which the housing authority is the apartmentowner.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(6) A housing authority may decide not to nominate any person
for election as a director of the management company where thenumber of apartments of which the housing authority is the apart-ment owner is equal to or less than 20 per cent of the total numberof apartments in the designated apartment complex.
66.—(1) Where ownership of an apartment in a designated apart-
ment complex is transferred, whether by conveyance, transfer,assignment, by operation of law or otherwise, membership of themanagement company which arises by virtue of ownership of theapartment shall, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in theCompanies Acts or other enactment, on such transfer stand trans-ferred to the person becoming entitled to the interest in the apart-ment concerned without the need to execute a transfer or have itapproved by the directors of the company, and such person shall —
(a) be entitled to exercise the powers, rights and entitlement
of a member in the company concerned, and
(b) subject to subsection (3) , be obliged to perform all the
obligations (including the payment of the apartment com-plex service charge, the charge in respect of the sinkingfund contribution and any other charges) pertaining tothe membership of the company concerned.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) a management company shall
take all steps necessary to ensure —
(a) that the share certificate or membership certificate, as
appropriate, is issued to the member concerned as soonas practicable following notification of the change ofownership of an apartment,
(b) that the register of members of the company is altered
accordingly, and
(c) that there is compliance with all other relevant require-
ments under the Companies Acts.
(3) This section is without prejudice to the rights, entitlements
and obligations of any person to whom an apartment in a designatedapartment complex was sold under section 90 of the Principal Act,whether before or after the coming into operation of this Part includ-ing a person in whom there subsequently becomes vested the interestof such person or his or her successor in title and the personal rep-resentative of that person or successor in title.
67.—(1) Before the end of the period specified in section 63(1) ,
and thereafter before the end of the first month of each financialyear, the management company shall prepare an estimate of theamount to be raised, in respect of the financial year concerned, byway of an annual charge or charges (in this Part referred to as the“apartment complex service charge ”) payable by apartment owners,
being the amount required to discharge ongoing expenditure reason-ably incurred on the insurance, maintenance (including cleaning andwaste management services) and repair of the common areas, struc-tures, works and services of the designated apartment complex con-cerned and on the provision of common or shared services to theapartment owners and occupiers of the designated apartmentcomplex.
75Pt.4 S.65
Automatic transfer
of membership ofmanagementcompany on sale ofapartment.
Apartment complex
service charge.Pt.4 S.67
76[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(2) The management company shall prepare the estimate referred
to in subsection (1) by reference to the actual or projected expendi-
ture for the financial year in respect of which the service charge isto be levied.
(3) The estimate referred to in subsection (1) shall include the
following categories:
(a) insurance;
(b) general maintenance;
(c) repairs;
(d) waste management;
(e) cleaning;
(f) gardening and landscaping;
(g) security services;
(h) legal services and accounts preparation; and
(i) other expenditure anticipated to arise in connection with
the maintenance, repair and management of the commonareas anticipated to arise.
(4) The apartment complex service charge for each financial year
shall not be levied by the management company unless it has beenconsidered by a general meeting of the members called for purposeswhich include the consideration of the estimate referred to in subsec-
tion (1) .
(5) The general meeting referred to in subsection (4) shall take
place within reasonable proximity to the designated apartment com-plex and at a reasonable time (unless otherwise agreed by a 75 percent majority vote of the members).
(6) ( a) The proposal in relation to the setting of the apartment
complex service charge may be amended at the meetingreferred to in subsection (4) with the approval of a 60 per
cent majority vote of the members present and voting atthe meeting.
(b) Where the apartment complex service charge proposed to
the general meeting is disapproved of by not less than a75 per cent majority vote of the members present andvoting at the meeting, the proposed apartment complexservice charge shall not take effect but the apartmentcomplex service charge applying to the previous financialyear shall continue to apply pending the adoption of anapartment complex service charge in respect of the finan-cial year concerned.
(7) The amount of the apartment complex service charge shall as
soon as practicable after its adoption under this section be leviedby the management company as a charge on each apartment in thedesignated apartment complex, the proportion of the apartmentcomplex service charge attributable to any apartment being the sameas the proportion which the floor area of that apartment, determined[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
in the prescribed manner, bears to the aggregate floor area of all
apartments in the designated apartment complex.
(8) ( a) In the case of a designated apartment complex where the
housing authority has sold one or more than one apart-ment under section 90 of the Principal Act, whetherbefore or after the coming into operation of this Part, themanagement company shall —
(i) determine the net amount of the apartment complex
service charge by deducting from the amount of theapartment complex service charge for the financialyear concerned the amount of its estimated servicecharge receipts for the current financial year fromthe apartment owners of the apartments so soldunder the terms and conditions of the transfer ordersin respect of the sales of those apartments,
(ii) excluding the apartments so sold from the calculation
and subject to the prior approval of the Minister,apportion the net amount of the apartment complexservice charge between each of the other apartmentsin the designated apartment complex by the methodof apportionment provided for in the said transferorders, and
(iii) levy the amount so apportioned in respect of each of
those other apartments in the designated apartmentcomplex as a charge on such apartment.
(b) The Minister shall not approve the method of apportion-
ment referred to in paragraph (a)(ii) where he or she is
not satisfied that such method is equitable as between theapartments referred to in paragraph (a)(iii) .
(c) Where the Minister does not approve the method of
apportionment referred to in paragraph (a)(ii) , the man-
agement company shall, excluding the apartments so soldunder section 90 of the Principal Act from the calcu-lation, apportion the net amount of the apartment com-plex service charge between each of the other apartmentsin the designated apartment complex by the method ofapportionment specified in subsection (7) .
(9) ( a) To the extent that any part of the apartment complex
service charge is not required for the year concerned, anyexcess shall be taken account of in setting the apartmentcomplex service charge for the following year.
(b) To the extent that the apartment complex service charge
is inadequate for the expenditure in the year concerned,the extent of such inadequacy may be added to the apart-ment complex service charge otherwise payable inrespect of the following year.
(10) The management company shall maintain sufficient and
proper records of expenditure incurred by it to enable appropriateverification and audits to be undertaken.
(11) The apartment complex service charge levied pursuant to this
section shall be applied for the purposes specified in subsection (1)
77Pt.4 S.67Pt.4 S.67
Sinking fund.
78[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
but any excess may, notwithstanding subsections (2) or(9),b e
applied on expenditure which may be incurred by the sinking fund.
(12) The Minister may make regulations prescribing the class or
classes of items of expenditure which may be the subject of the apart-ment complex service charge.
68.—(1) Before the end of the period specified in section 63(1) ,
the management company shall establish a building investment fund(in this Part referred to as a “sinking fund ”) for the purpose of dis-
charging expenditure reasonably incurred, in respect of the desig-nated apartment complex concerned on —
(a) refurbishment,
(b) improvement,
(c) maintenance of a non-recurring nature, or
(d) advice from a suitably qualified person relating to para-
graphs (a) to(c).
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) , expenditure shall not be
considered to be expenditure on maintenance of a non-recurringnature —
(a) where the expenditure relates to a matter in respect of
which expenditure is generally incurred in each year,
(b) unless it is certified by the directors of the management
company as being expenditure on maintenance of a non-recurring nature, and
(c) unless the expenditure is approved by a meeting of the
members as being expenditure on maintenance of a non-recurring nature.
(3) ( a) Before the end of the period specified in section 63(1) ,
and thereafter before the end of the first month of eachfinancial year, the management company shall, subject toparagraph (b) prepare an estimate of the sum of moneys
(referred to in this Part as the “sinking fund
contribution ”) that it considers appropriate and prudent
for addition to the sinking fund in the financial year con-cerned and, applying the method of apportionment speci-fied in subsection (4)(a) or(b), as appropriate, calculate
the amount equal to the proportion of the sinking fundcontribution that would be attributable to each apart-ment in the designated apartment complex.
(b) The management company shall not prepare an estimate
of the sinking fund contribution for the financial yearconcerned which, when apportioned between each apart-ment in the designated apartment complex in accordancewith paragraph (a) , results in the smallest amount attribu-
table to any apartment being less than \200 or such other
amount as may be prescribed for the purposes of thissubsection.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(c) If, under the calculation set out in paragraph (a) , the
smallest amount attributable to any apartment in the des-ignated apartment complex is equal to \200 or such other
amount as may be prescribed for the purposes of this sub-section, the management company may adopt its estimateunder paragraph (a) as the sinking fund contribution for
the financial year concerned.
(d) If under the calculation specified in paragraph (a) , the
smallest amount attributable to any apartment in theapartment complex is more than \200 or such other
amount as may be prescribed for the purposes of this sub-section, the sinking fund contribution for the financialyear shall be adopted by a general meeting of memberscalled for those purposes, provided that such contri-bution, when apportioned between each apartment in thedesignated apartment complex on the same basis as theapartment complex service charge, does not result in thesmallest amount attributable to any apartment being lessthan \200 or such other amount as may be prescribed for
the purposes of this subsection.
(4) The amount of the sinking fund contribution shall, as soon
as practicable after its determination, be levied by the managementcompany as a charge on each apartment in the designated apartmentcomplex, the amount being apportioned between each apartment inthe designated apartment complex on the same basis as the apart-ment complex service charge is apportioned —
(a) in accordance with section 67(7) ,o r
(b) in the case of a designated apartment complex where the
housing authority has sold one or more than one apart-ment under section 90 of the Principal Act, in accordancewith section 67(8) .
(5) The contributions made to the sinking fund shall be held in a
separate account and in a manner which identifies such funds asbelonging to the sinking fund and those funds shall not be used orexpended on matters other than expenditure of a type referred to insubsection (1) .
(6) The Minister may make regulations prescribing all or any one
or more of the following:
(a) a class or classes of expenditure which may be incurred by
a sinking fund;
(b) thresholds of expenditure (by reference to amounts of
expenditure or by reference to the proportion of the sink-ing fund) which necessitate approval of the members;
(c) any other amount for the purposes of subsection (3) having
regard to the average level of service charges in desig-nated apartment complexes.
69.—(1) A management company may issue a single request for
payment of the aggregate of the charges arising under sections 67
and 68, and every request for payment, whether in reliance on this
section or on section 67 or68shall set out the basis of the calculation
79Pt.4 S.68
Management
company annualcharges.Pt.4 S.69
Apartment complex
support fund.
80[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
of the charge, a breakdown of how it is calculated and the amount
payable in respect of the apartment concerned.
(2) Where payment of charges arising under sections 67 and 68
are requested or collected together such charges may collectively bereferred to as “management company annual charges ”.
(3) It shall be a condition of the apartment transfer order and the
apartment assignment order that —
(a) the apartment owner shall pay the management company
annual charges of such amount or amounts and at suchtimes and in such manner as the management companymay specify subject to and in accordance with the termsand conditions of the apartment transfer order or theapartment assignment order, as the case may be, and
(b) where the apartment owner fails to comply with the obli-
gation in paragraph (a) , the management company shall
have the right to re-enter and take possession of theapartment, whereupon the term of the apartment transferorder or the apartment assignment order, as the case maybe, shall end, without prejudice to the rights and remediesof the company in respect of any such charge in arrearsor of any other breach of the apartment transfer order orapartment assignment order.
(4) Where the management company annual charges or part
thereof remain unpaid by the apartment owner on the expiration ofthe period for payment specified in the apartment transfer order orapartment assignment order, as the case may be, the amount con-cerned shall bear interest, at the rate provided for therein and calcu-lated in accordance therewith.
(5) Where, during the charged period, the management company
annual charges or part thereof remain unpaid by the apartment pur-chaser concerned for a period of more than 6 months after the expiryof the period for payment of the charge specified in the apartmentassignment order, the management company shall notify the housingauthority in writing.
(6) Where a housing authority sells an apartment to the tenant
thereof under this Part, it shall not be liable, in respect of any periodafter the date on which the housing authority signs the apartmentassignment order, for the management company annual charges forthe proportion of the financial year remaining after that date or forany financial year thereafter.
70.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , on the first sale of an apartment
in a designated apartment complex to the tenant thereof under thisPart, the housing authority shall establish, maintain and account fora fund (referred to in this Part as an “apartment complex support
fund ”) for the purposes set out in subsection (4) .
(2) ( a) The housing authority shall, on the establishment of the
apartment complex support fund, pay into the fund anamount fixed in accordance with paragraph (b) .
(b) The amount referred to in paragraph (a) shall be calcu-
lated as the sum of the prescribed proportion of the pur-chase price on the date of the first sale referred to in[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
subsection (1) of each apartment in the designated apart-
ment complex, including community apartments and anyapartments sold to tenants under section 90 of the Princi-pal Act whether before or after the coming into oper-ation of this Part, which proportion shall not exceed thegreater of —
(i) 5 per cent of such purchase price, or
(ii) such amount as may be prescribed for the purposes
of this section having regard to the number and sizeof the apartments comprised in the designated apart-ment complex concerned.
(3) The moneys referred to in subsection (2) in respect of one or
more than one designated apartment complex may be held in, man-aged and accounted for by a housing authority in a single apartmentcomplex support fund, provided that the funding for each such apart-ment complex is capable of being separately identified.
(4) The housing authority, in accordance with this section, on a
request being made in that behalf by the management company andsubject to there being sufficient moneys in the apartment complexsupport fund, may decide to transfer moneys from the apartmentcomplex support fund to the company ’s sinking fund to meet expen-
diture by, or on behalf of, the management company on any of theworks referred to in section 68(1)(a) to(c).
(5) ( a) Where a request is made under subsection (4) , the man-
agement company shall, as the housing authority mayreasonably require for the purpose of deciding whetherto transfer moneys from the apartment complex supportfund to the sinking fund —
(i) provide details (including drawings and estimated
costs) of the proposed works,
(ii) provide financial and other information (including the
company ’s records relating to management, main-
tenance and repair of the common areas, structures,works and services), and
(iii) carry out, or facilitate the housing authority in carry-
ing out, inspections, surveys and tests.
(b) The reasonable costs incurred by the management com-
pany in meeting the requirements of a housing authorityunder this subsection shall be paid by the housingauthority.
(6) A housing authority may refuse to transfer moneys under sub-
section (4) where it is of the opinion that any of the following applies:
(a) the works proposed are not in the interest of good estate
management;
(b) the management company is not in a position to meet the
cost of the works, from its own resources, including thesinking fund, moneys which it has requested under sub-
section (4) from the apartment complex support fund
and borrowings;
81Pt.4 S.70Pt.4 S.70
82[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(c) the works proposed are necessary because of the manage-
ment company ’s failure to discharge its obligations under
section 63(3) , whether this failure is attributable to the
company ’s failure to levy or collect an adequate apart-
ment complex service charge in one or more than onefinancial year, or otherwise;
(d) the moneys may be used by the management company for
purposes other than the carrying out of the works pro-posed, including eliminating or reducing any excess ofexpenditure over income (but not including the sinkingfund) on the management company ’s accounts.
(7) Where a housing authority decides to transfer moneys under
subsection (4) it may do all or any of the following —
(a) transfer from the apartment complex support fund the
amount requested by the management company undersubsection (4) or an amount less than that so requested;
(b) attach such conditions as it considers appropriate to its
decision including conditions specifying —
(i) the works to be carried out,
(ii) the works not to be carried out,
(iii) the standard of the works to be carried out, and
(iv) the timing and content of reports to be given to the
housing authority in relation to the works carriedout;
(c) transfer same to the sinking fund of the management com-
pany in such instalments and at such times as the housingauthority considers reasonable having regard to the pro-gress of the works concerned.
(8) The management company in carrying out any of the works
referred to in section 68(1)(a) to(c)shall comply with such con-
ditions if any as may be attached under subsection (7)(b) to the
decision to transfer moneys under subsection (4) .
(9) ( a) The housing authority may, for the purpose of establishing
that the moneys transferred under subsection (4) were
used for the purpose for which they were intended and incompliance with the conditions attached under subsection
(7)(b) to its decision to transfer moneys, carry out such
further inspections, surveys and tests of the works con-cerned as it considers necessary.
(b) The management company shall facilitate the housing
authority in the carrying out of the inspections, surveysand tests referred to in paragraph (a) and, if requested
by the authority, shall itself carry out such inspections,surveys and tests of the works concerned, as the housingauthority considers necessary, the reasonable cost ofwhich shall be paid by the housing authority.
(10) ( a) The management company shall be liable to repay to the
housing authority —[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(i) in case of its failure to use all or any of the moneys
transferred under subsection (4) for the purpose for
which they were intended, the entire of such moneysor such part thereof, as the case may be, or
(ii) in case of a breach of one or more than one condition
attached by the authority under subsection (7)(b) to
its decision to transfer moneys under subsection (4) ,
that proportion of the amount of the transferredmoneys corresponding to the cost of complying withthe condition or conditions concerned expressed asa proportion of the total cost of carrying out theworks in respect of which the authority agreed to sotransfer moneys.
(b) Any moneys due and owing to the housing authority under
paragraph (a) shall, subject to section 71 , be repaid by the
management company not later than 2 months after thedate on which the authority demands repayment from themanagement company by notice in writing specifying thematters giving rise to the demand for repayment and theamount concerned.
(c) Any moneys repaid by a management company to a hous-
ing authority under this subsection shall be paid into theapartment complex support fund.
(11) The housing authority may recoup from the apartment com-
plex support fund such reasonable expenses as it may incur in theexercise of its functions under this section.
(12) The apartment complex support fund shall consist of a cur-
rent account (in this section referred to as the “current account ”)
and an investment account (in this section referred to as the “invest-
ment account ”).
(13) The housing authority shall pay into the current account,
from time to time, the amount that the authority determines isrequired for the purposes of —
(a) transferring moneys to a sinking fund under this section,
and
(b) defraying the costs incurred by the authority —
(i) under subsection (5)(b) ,(9)or(11), as the case may
be, and
(ii) in the performance of its functions under this section
relating to management of the apartment complexsupport fund.
(14) All other moneys standing to the credit of the apartment
complex support fund shall be paid into the investment account.
(15) Whenever the moneys in the current account are insufficient
to meet the liabilities of the apartment complex support fund speci-fied in subsection (13) , there shall be paid into that account from the
investment account the moneys that are necessary to meet thoseliabilities.
83Pt.4 S.70Pt.4 S.70
Dispute between
housing authorityand managementcompany arisingunder section
70(10) .
Accounts of
managementcompany.
84[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(16) Moneys in the investment account that are not required to
meet current and prospective liabilities of that account shall beinvested and the investments shall be realised or varied from time totime as occasion requires and the proceeds of any such realisation,and any dividends or other payments received in respect of moneysinvested under this paragraph, shall be paid into the investmentaccount or invested under this subsection.
(17) An investment under subsection (16) shall be invested in the
State and in the currency of the State —
(a) in the securities (other than shares in a company) that the
housing authority considers appropriate, or
(b) by way of deposit of moneys with any credit institution, or
the investment of moneys in short term financial prod-ucts, such as certificates of deposit or commercial paper,issued by any person.
71.—(1) Where there is a dispute between the housing authority
and the management company on any matter relating to a demandfor repayment under section 70(10) , which is subsequently resolved
by agreement in writing between the housing authority and the man-agement company, repayment of the amount concerned or anyrevised amount shall be made by the management company not laterthan 2 months after the date of the agreement.
(2) Where there is a dispute between the housing authority and
the management company relating to the demand for repaymentunder section 70(10) in respect of a breach of a condition attached
under section 70(7)(b) to its agreement to transfer moneys under
section 70(4) , subject to the agreement of the parties in writing, the
dispute may be resolved by the management company agreeing tocarry out, at its expense, such additional works as are agreed by theparties to be necessary to secure compliance with the conditionconcerned.
(3) Where there is a dispute between the housing authority and
the management company on any matter or matters relating to thedemand for repayment under section 70(10) , which cannot be
resolved to the satisfaction of both parties, the matter shall be deter-mined by conciliation procedures agreed between both parties or, indefault of such agreement, by arbitration under the Arbitration Acts1954 to 1998.
72.—(1) A management company shall keep all proper and usual
books or other accounts of —
(a) all moneys received or expended by it, and
(b) all property, assets and liabilities of the management
company,
including an income and expenditure account and a balance sheet.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , a man-
agement company shall establish, operate and maintain financialsystems, accounts, reporting and record keeping procedures, includ-ing the preparation of annual financial statements, which are basedon generally accepted accounting principles and practices.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(3) A management company shall —
(a) submit to the housing authority concerned a copy of its
annual audited accounts no later than 4 months after theend of each financial year of the management companyto which the accounts relate, and
(b) on the request of any member, provide a copy of those
accounts at a price not exceeding the reasonable cost ofreproduction.
(4) Subsection (3)(a) shall cease to apply in respect of the finan-
cial year following the financial year in which the sale of an apart-ment results in the total number of all apartments in the designatedapartment complex that are sold exceeding by one the total number,divided by 2, of apartments (including any community apartment) inthe designated apartment complex, rounded up to the nearest wholenumber, as appropriate.
73.—(1) In this section “specified body ”means —
(a) the housing authority which transferred ownership of the
designated apartment complex to the management com-pany under an apartment complex transfer order,
(b) a company referred to in subsection (6) ,o r
(c) an approved body.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , a management company and a speci-
fied body may enter into an agreement (in this Part referred to as a“property services agreement ”) for the purposes of the provision of
such property management services, as may be specified in the agree-ment, to the management company in respect of the designatedapartment complex.
(3) In the case of a property services agreement between a man-
agement company and a housing authority the agreement shall befor such period not exceeding 5 years from the date of the first sale ofan apartment to the tenant thereof under this Part in the designatedapartment complex concerned.
(4) A property services agreement shall be in writing and shall
be subject to the terms and conditions and include the informationspecified in Schedule 4 .
(5) The expenses incurred by a specified body in the provision of
property management services pursuant to a property services agree-ment, shall be recouped to the specified body by the managementcompany in accordance with the terms and conditions of theagreement.
(6) A housing authority may, for the purposes of this section,
establish a company whose objects include the provision of propertymanagement services to management companies, which companyshall be a company formed and registered under the CompaniesActs.
74.—(1) As soon as practicable after an apartment is sold to an
apartment purchaser under this Part, the housing authority shall,
85Pt.4 S.72
Property services
agreement.
Charging order.Pt.4 S.74
86[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
subject to such regulations as may be made under section 77 , make
an order (in this Part referred to as a “charging order ”), in the pre-
scribed form, charging the apartment in the terms specified in thissection for the period specified in the order (in this Part referred toas the “charged period ”).
(2) The charging order shall create a charge in favour of the hous-
ing authority in respect of an undivided percentage share (in thisPart referred to as the “charged share ”), calculated in accordance
with subsection (3) , in the apartment which charged share shall be
reduced in accordance with subsection (4) .
(3) The charged share is calculated in accordance with the follow-
ing formula:
Y x 100
Z
where —
(a) Y is the difference between the purchase price of the
apartment at the time of sale to the apartment purchaserand the purchase money, and
(b) Z is the purchase price of the apartment at the time of sale
to the apartment purchaser.
(4) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) and section 75 , the charged share
shall be reduced in equal proportions (referred to in thissection as “incremental releases ”) applied annually on
the anniversary of the date of the apartment assignmentorder in respect of each complete year after that dateduring which an apartment purchaser or a member of hisor her household has been in occupation of the apart-ment as his or her normal place of residence, until theearlier of —
(i) subject to section 76 , the first resale of the apart-
ment, or
(ii) subject to section 75 , the expiration of the charged
period.
(b) The reduction of the charged share for the period of 5
years from the date of the apartment assignment ordershall be cumulative and shall not apply until the expir-ation of that period, provided the apartment purchaseror a member of his or her household has been in occu-pation of the apartment as his or her normal place ofresidence for that period.
(5) The housing authority shall, at any time where requested by
the apartment purchaser, give a statement in writing in the pre-scribed form, to the apartment purchaser indicating the accumulatedamount of incremental releases that have been applied under thecharging order.
(6) A charging order shall be deemed to be a mortgage made by
deed within the meaning of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911 andto have been executed, at the time of the sale of the apartment, in[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
favour of the housing authority for a charge in the terms provided
for in this section.
(7) Accordingly, the housing authority shall, as on and from the
making of the charging order —
(a) be deemed to be a mortgagee of the apartment for the
purposes of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911, and
(b) have, in relation to the charge referred to in subsection (8) ,
all the powers conferred by those Acts on mortgageesunder mortgages made by deed.
(8) Where a housing authority makes a charging order, it shall, as
soon as practicable thereafter, cause the order to be registered in theRegistry of Deeds or the Land Registry, as appropriate, and it shallbe a sufficient description of the charge in respect of which the orderis being registered to state that charge to be the charge referred toinsection 74(2) of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 .
(9) A charging order affecting an apartment which is registered
land within the meaning of the Registration of Title Act 1964 shallbe registrable as a burden affecting such land whether the personnamed in the order as the owner of the land is or is not registeredunder the said Act as the owner of the land.
(10) A housing authority may, subject to subsection (11) , enter
into an agreement with a holder of a licence under the Central BankAct 1971, a building society or other financial institution that acharge proposed to be created by it by a charging order shall have apriority, as against a mortgage or charge proposed to be created infavour of that holder, society or institution, that is different from the
priority the charge would otherwise have if this subsection had notbeen enacted.
(11) A housing authority may only enter into an agreement
referred to in subsection (10) if it considers that the agreement will —
(a) enable a tenant to whom it is proposing to sell an apart-
ment under this Part to obtain an advance of moneysfrom the holder, society or institution referred to in sub-
section (10) for the purposes of purchasing the apart-
ment, or
(b) enable an apartment purchaser —
(i) to refinance an existing advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(10),o r
(ii) to obtain a further advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(10), for any purpose.
(12) Any amount that becomes payable to a housing authority
under section 75 or76, as the case may be, may, without prejudice
to any other power in that behalf, be recovered by the housing auth-ority from the person concerned as a simple contract debt in anycourt of competent jurisdiction.
87Pt.4 S.74Pt.4 S.74
Suspension of
reduction ofcharged share.
88[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(13) For the avoidance of doubt, neither a charging order nor a
charge that arises under it shall be regarded as a conveyance for thepurposes of section 3 of the Family Home Protection Act 1976.
(14) ( a) On the occurrence of the earlier of the events specified in
subsection (4)(a) and subject to the terms and conditions
of the apartment assignment order and of the chargingorder having been complied with, the housing authorityshall, where requested to do so by the apartment pur-chaser, execute a deed of discharge in respect of thecharging order.
(b) The housing authority shall be liable for any expenses
incurred in the execution and registration of a deed ofdischarge but shall not otherwise be liable for anyexpenses incurred by an apartment purchaser under thissection or under section 75 or76.
75.—(1) A housing authority may suspend the reduction of the
charged share provided for under section 74 in respect of any year
ending on the anniversary of the apartment assignment order, wherethe apartment purchaser fails to comply with any of the terms andconditions of the apartment assignment order.
(2) Where the housing authority suspends the reduction of the
charged share under subsection (1) , the charged share on the prop-
erty shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula:
Yx1 0 0-R
Z
where —
(a) Y is the difference between the purchase price of the
apartment at the time of sale to the apartment purchaser
and the purchase money,
(b) Z is the purchase price of the apartment at the time of sale
to the apartment purchaser, and
(c) R is the portion of the charged share that has been
released in accordance with this subsection.
(3) ( a) Where a housing authority has suspended the reduction
of the charged share under subsection (1) , the housing
authority shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, notifythe apartment purchaser in writing of the suspension andthe reasons for the suspension.
(b) The housing authority shall, on the expiration of the
charged period, give a statement to the apartment pur-chaser in writing, in the prescribed form, indicating theamount of the charge outstanding under the chargingorder on the date of expiration of the charged period,which amount shall be expressed as a percentage of themarket value of the apartment, equivalent to the chargedshare of the housing authority in the apartment on thatdate calculated in accordance with subsection (2) .[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(4) ( a) The apartment purchaser shall, within 2 months of receipt
of the statement referred to in subsection (3) , pay to the
housing authority the amount set out in the statement.
(b) Where the apartment purchaser fails to pay the amount
referred to in paragraph (a) ,section 74(12) applies.
(5) For the purposes of this section, “market value ”means the
price for which an apartment might reasonably be expected to besold on the date of expiration of the charged period, in its existingstate of repair and condition and not subject to the conditions speci-fied in section 64(5) or to a charging order.
(6) ( a) For the purposes of this section, the market value of an
apartment shall be determined by the housing authorityor, where the apartment purchaser does not agree withthe market value so determined, by an independentvaluer nominated by the apartment purchaser from apanel of suitably qualified persons, established by thehousing authority, who are of a class or description pre-scribed under section 77 .
(b) The housing authority shall not be liable for any expenses
incurred by an apartment purchaser under paragraph (a) .
76.—(1) In this section references to an apartment purchaser shall
not include a person in whom there subsequently becomes vested,for valuable consideration, the interest of the apartment purchaseror the successor in title of that person and the personal representa-tive of that person or successor in title.
(2) Where an apartment purchaser proposes to sell an apartment
during the charged period, he or she shall give prior written noticeto the housing authority in accordance with the terms and conditionsspecified in the apartment assignment order.
(3) Upon receipt of a notice referred to in subsection (2) , the
housing authority may purchase the apartment for a sum equivalentto its current market value, reduced by an amount equal to that pro-portion of the current market value of the apartment correspondingto the charged share in the apartment on the date of resale.
(4) Without prejudice to any other power in that behalf, a housing
authority may refuse to consent to the sale to any person of theapartment where the housing authority is of the opinion that —
(a) the proposed sale price is less than the current market
value,
(b) the said person is or was engaged in anti-social behaviour
or the sale would not be in the interest of good estatemanagement, or
(c) the intended sale would, if completed, leave the vendor or
any person who might reasonably be expected to residewith him or her without adequate housing.
(5) Where an apartment purchaser resells an apartment to a per-
son other than a housing authority during the charged period theapartment purchaser shall pay to the housing authority an amountequal to a percentage of the current market value, such percentage
89Pt.4 S.75
Control on resale of
apartment subjectto a charging order.Pt.4 S.76
Regulations ( Part
4).
90[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
being the equivalent of the charged share of the authority in the
apartment on the date of resale of the apartment.
(6) Where the amount payable under any of the provisions of this
section would reduce the proceeds of the sale (disregarding solicitorand estate agent ’s costs and fees) below the purchase money, the
amount payable under the charging order shall be reduced to theextent necessary to avoid that result.
(7) Where a purchaser resells an apartment which is subject to a
charging order the charged period of which has expired and inrespect of which the amount referred to in section 75(3) has not been
paid in accordance with that section, section 74(12) applies.
(8) ( a) For the purposes of this section, the current market value
of an apartment shall be determined by the housing auth-ority or, where the vendor does not agree with the cur-rent market value so determined, by an independentvaluer nominated by the vendor from a panel of suitablyqualified persons, established by the housing authority,who are of a class or description prescribed undersection 77.
(b) The housing authority shall not be liable for any expenses
incurred by a vendor under paragraph (a).
77.—The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of this
Part in relation to all or any one or more of the following:
(a) the class or classes of apartment that are excluded from
sale under this Part;
(b) the minimum period for which a person must be a tenant
for the purposes of making an application to purchase anapartment under this Part, which period shall not in anycase be less than one year before the date of the makingof such application;
(c) the method for determining the purchase price;
(d) the method for determining the purchase money, taking
account of the financial circumstances of tenants to whomapartment may be sold;
(e) the method for determining the amount of a deposit to be
paid by the apartment purchaser under section 64(6) in
respect of the purchase of an apartment under this Part;
(f) the form of, and terms and conditions to be specified in, an
apartment complex transfer order, an apartment transferorder and an apartment assignment order;
(g) the form of a charging order;
(h) the determination of the minimum period, or the range
within which a housing authority shall fix the minimumperiod, for which a charging order shall apply in respectof an apartment sold under this Part, which period shallnot in any case be less than 20 years from the date of theapartment assignment order;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(i) the determination of the floor area of an apartment, for
the purpose of section 67(7) ;
(j) the proportion of the sum of the purchase price of each
apartment in the designated apartment complex that ahousing authority shall pay into the apartment complexsupport fund under section 70(2) and the maximum
amount that it shall pay into the fund under thatprovision;
(k) the form of the statement to be issued by a housing auth-
ority under section 74(5) or75(3) , as the case may be;
(l) the class or classes or description of person who are suit-
ably qualified by reference to their qualifications andexperience to determine the current market value ormarket value (within the meaning of section 75 ), as the
case may be, of an apartment for any of the purposes ofthis Part.
PART 5
AFFORDABLE DWELLING PURCHASE ARRANGEMENTS
78.—(1) In this Part —
“affordable dwelling ”has the meaning given to it by section 82 ;
“Affordable Dwellings Fund ”has the meaning given to it in section
94;
“affordable dwelling purchase arrangement ”has the meaning given
to it by section 83 ;
“charging order ”has the meaning given to it by section 86 ;
“charged period ”has the meaning given to it by section 86 ;
“direct sales agreement ”has the meaning given to it by section 80 ;
“eligible household ”means a household assessed by a housing auth-
ority under section 84 as being eligible for an affordable dwelling
purchase arrangement;
“market value ”, in relation to an affordable dwelling, means the
price for which the dwelling might reasonably be expected to be soldon the open market;
“net market value ”means the market value reduced by an allowance
equal to the amount of the market value attributable to materialimprovements;
“open market dwelling ”has the meaning given to it by section 81 ;
“Part V agreement ”has the meaning given to it by section 80 ;
“purchase money ”, in relation to an affordable dwelling, means the
monetary value of the proportion of the purchase price of the dwell-ing fixed by the housing authority as the proportion that is required
91Pt.4 S.77
Interpretation ( Part
5).Pt.5 S.78
Provision of
dwellings.
92[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
to be paid by an eligible household to purchase the dwelling under
an affordable dwelling purchase arrangement;
“purchaser ”means a person who purchases an affordable dwelling
under an affordable dwelling purchase arrangement and includes aperson in whom there subsequently becomes vested (other than forvaluable consideration) the interest of the purchaser or his or hersuccessor in title and the personal representative of that person orsuccessor in title;
“scheme of priority ”has the meaning given to it by section 85 .
(2) In this Part save where the context otherwise requires, a refer-
ence to a transfer of ownership shall be construed as a reference toa deed of transfer, conveyance or assignment.
(3) ( a) Material improvements to an apartment shall not be taken
into account for any of the purposes of this Part.
(b) In this subsection “apartment ”means a separate and self-
contained dwelling in a premises, divided into 2 or moresuch apartments, which requires arrangements for theupkeep and management of all or any part of the com-mon areas, structures, works or services other than bythe purchaser.
79.—(1) A housing authority may make dwellings available for
the purpose of sale to eligible households under affordable dwellingpurchase arrangements and may, in accordance with the Housing
Acts 1966 to 2009 and regulations made thereunder, acquire, build
or cause to be built, or otherwise provide or facilitate the provisionof, dwellings for that purpose.
(2) A housing authority may, for the purposes of subsection (1) ,
enter into —
(a) arrangements with an approved body, or
(b) public private partnership arrangements.
(3) The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for Fin-
ance, pay, out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas, a grant towardsthe cost of making dwellings available under this section to all or anyof the following:
(a) a housing authority, in respect of dwellings made available
by the authority or provided by an approved body orother person on behalf of the authority;
(b) the Affordable Homes Partnership (established pursuant
to the Affordable Homes Partnership (Establishment)Order 2005 (S.I. No. 383 of 2005)), in respect of afford-able dwellings acquired or provided by it on behalf ofhousing authorities;
(c) such other body, established by or under statute, as the
Minister may prescribe by order for the purposes of thissection whose functions include the provision of servicesto a housing authority in relation to the acquisition ofdwellings.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(4) In performing its functions under subsection (1) , a housing
authority shall have regard to its housing services plan and theneed to —
(a) counteract undue segregation in housing between persons
of different social backgrounds, and
(b) ensure that a mixture of dwelling types and sizes is pro-
vided to reasonably match the requirements of eligiblehouseholds.
80.—(1) This section applies to the following persons —
(a) a person with whom the housing authority has a contract
for the provision of dwellings for the purposes of section
79,
(b) a public private partnership with whom the housing auth-
ority has entered into an arrangement under section
79(2)(b) for the provision of dwellings for the purposes
of that section, and
(c) a person with whom the planning authority has entered
into an agreement under section 96(2) of Part V of thePlanning and Development Act 2000 for the provision ofdwellings referred to in section 94(4)( a) of that Act (in
this Part referred to as a “Part V agreement ”).
(2) A housing authority, pursuant to its functions under section
79, or a planning authority, pursuant to its functions under Part V of
the Planning and Development Act 2000, may enter into an agree-ment (in this Part referred to as a “direct sales agreement ”) with a
person to whom this section applies for the direct sale, in accordancewith this Part, of the dwellings specified in the agreement to eligiblehouseholds nominated by the housing authority in accordance witha scheme of priority.
(3) A direct sales agreement shall provide that a person to whom
this section applies may carry out any necessary transactions inrelation to the direct sale, in accordance with this Part, of the dwell-ings specified in the agreement to eligible households, subject to theterms and conditions specified in subsection (4) .
(4) The terms and conditions referred to in subsection (3) —
(a) shall include the following:
(i) that the sale price for each dwelling specified in the
agreement shall be the purchase money;
(ii) that the dwellings specified in the agreement shall be
sold directly to eligible households nominated by thehousing authority in accordance with a scheme ofpriority;
(iii) terms and conditions relating to —
(I) arrangements for the completion of sales,
(II) notification of sales to the housing authority, and
93Pt.5 S.79
Direct sales
agreement.Pt.5 S.80
Open market
dwelling.
Application of Part
5.
Affordable dwelling
purchasearrangements.
94[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(III) any other matters relating to the sale of the
dwellings specified in the agreement to eligiblehouseholds,
and
(b) may include such other terms and conditions relating to
the transactions referred to in subsection (3) as may be
prescribed for the purposes of affordable dwelling pur-chase arrangements.
(5) In the case of a Part V agreement, where the total amount
due under a direct sales agreement to a person referred to in subsec-
tion (1)(c) is less than the amount due to such person under the Part
V agreement, the amount of any such difference shall be paid by thehousing authority to that person.
81.—(1) A housing authority may, subject to the Housing Acts
1966 to 2009 , and regulations made thereunder, provide financial
assistance to an eligible household to purchase a dwelling (in thisPart referred to as an “open market dwelling ”) under an affordable
dwelling purchase arrangement, subject to the dwelling being —
(a) available for purchase in the State, and
(b) of a class of dwelling prescribed under section 95(1)(a) for
the purposes of this section.
(2) The amount of financial assistance which may be provided to
an eligible household under this section in respect of the purchase ofan open market dwelling —
(a) shall be the difference between the purchase money and
the market value of the dwelling, and
(b) shall not exceed such maximum amount as the Minister
may prescribe under section 95(1)(d) .
82.—This Part applies to the following dwellings (in this Part
referred to as “affordable dwellings ”):
(a) dwellings made available by a housing authority under
section 79 ;
(b) dwellings to which a Part V agreement applies, including
dwellings made available for sale under such an agree-ment but not yet sold before the coming into operationof this Part;
(c) dwellings made available for sale in accordance with Part
2 of the Act of 2002 but not yet sold before the cominginto operation of this Part and section 7 (in so far as it
applies to the said Act);
(d) open market dwellings.
83.—(1) A housing authority may, in accordance with this Part
and the Housing Acts 1966 to 2004 and subject to such regulationsas may be made under section 95 , enter into an arrangement (in this[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Part referred to as an “affordable dwelling purchase arrangement ”)
for the sale of an affordable dwelling under this Part to an eligiblehousehold in accordance with a scheme of priority.
(2) The arrangements referred to in subsection (1) are as follows:
(a) in the case of an affordable dwelling which is the subject
of a direct sales agreement, in consideration of the receiptof the purchase money specified in the agreement, thedwelling may be sold to an eligible household in accord-ance with and subject to the terms and conditions speci-fied in subsection (3) , the terms and conditions of a
charging order and such other terms and conditions asmay be prescribed for the purposes of affordable dwellingpurchase arrangements;
(b) in the case of an affordable dwelling referred to in section
82(a) ,(b),o r (c), in consideration of the receipt by the
housing authority of the purchase money, the housingauthority shall transfer its ownership in the dwelling bymeans of an order (in this Part referred to as a “transfer
order ”), in the prescribed form, made by the housing
authority which shall be expressed and shall operate tovest, on the date specified in the transfer order, theinterest specified in the order, in accordance with andsubject to the terms and conditions specified in subsection
(3), the terms and conditions of a charging order and such
other terms and conditions as may be prescribed for thepurposes of affordable dwelling purchase arrangements;
(c) in the case of an open market dwelling, the provision by
the housing authority of financial assistance under section
81to an eligible household to purchase the dwelling sub-
ject to the terms and conditions specified in subsection
(3), the terms and conditions of a charging order and such
other terms and conditions as may be prescribed for thepurposes of affordable dwelling purchase arrangements.
(3) The terms and conditions referred to in subsection (2) —
(a) shall include the following:
(i) that where the purchaser sells the dwelling during the
charged period, the purchaser shall pay to the hous-ing authority an amount calculated in accordancewith section 90 ;
(ii) that the dwelling shall, during the charged period,
unless the housing authority gives its prior writtenconsent, be occupied as the normal place of resi-dence of the purchaser or of a member of the pur-chaser ’s household;
(iii) that the dwelling or any part thereof shall not, during
the charged period, without the prior written consentof the housing authority, be let or sublet;
(iv) terms and conditions relating to the making of pay-
ments under section 87 ,89or90, as the case may be,
and the consequences for the purchaser of failure tomake those payments,
95Pt.5 S.83Pt.5 S.83
Assessment of
eligibility ofhousehold foraffordable dwellingpurchasearrangement.
96[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
and
(b) may include the following:
(i) that the dwelling or any part thereof shall not, during
the charged period, without the prior written consentof the housing authority, be sold, assigned or other-wise disposed of or mortgaged, charged or alienated,otherwise than by devise or operation of the law;
(ii) terms and conditions relating to the payment by the
eligible household of a deposit of such amount asmay be prescribed under section 95(1)(e)(ii) .
(4) Save as provided for by any other enactment or regulations
made thereunder, the sale of a dwelling under an affordable dwellingpurchase arrangement referred to in subsection (2)(a) shall not imply
any warranty on the part of the housing authority concerned inrelation to the state of repair or condition of the dwelling or its fit-ness for human habitation.
(5) Section 211(2) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and
section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 shall not apply to thesale of a dwelling to an eligible household under an affordable dwell-ing purchase arrangement.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall preclude a housing authority from
making a loan under section 11 of the Act of 1992 to an eligiblehousehold for any of the purposes of this Part.
84.—(1) A reference in this section to a household shall be read
as including a reference to 2 or more persons who, in the opinion ofthe housing authority concerned, have a reasonable requirement tolive together.
(2) Where a household applies to a housing authority to purchase
an affordable dwelling under an affordable dwelling purchasearrangement, the housing authority shall, subject to and in accord-ance with this section and any regulations made under this sectionand section 95 , carry out an assessment of the household ’s eligibility
for an affordable dwelling purchase arrangement taking account ofthe following:
(a) the accommodation needs of the household, having regard
to, but not necessarily limited to the following —
(i) the current housing circumstances of the household,
(ii) the distance of such preferred location or locations as
the household may indicate in its application fromthe place of employment of any member of thehousehold, and
(iii) whether any members of the household are attending
any university, college, school or other educationalestablishment in the administrative area concerned;
(b) subject to subsection (3) , whether the income of the house-
hold is adequate to meet the repayments on a mortgagefor the purchase of a dwelling to meet the accom-modation needs of the household because the payments[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
calculated over the course of a year would exceed 35 per
cent of the annual income of the household net of incometax and pay related social insurance;
(c) subject to subsections (4) and (5), whether the household
or any household member has previously purchased orbuilt a dwelling for his or her occupation or for any otherpurpose in the State;
(d) subject to subsections (4) and (5), whether the household
or any household member either owns, or is beneficiallyentitled to, an interest in any dwelling or land in the Stateor elsewhere.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b) , any other assets of the
household which could be used to defray all or any part of the costof providing accommodation to meet the accommodation needs ofthe household shall be taken into account.
(4) Where the household making an application for the purposes
of this section, or any member of the household, was a spouse to amarriage the subject of a deed of separation, a decree of judicialseparation, a decree of divorce or a decree of nullity, subsection
(2)(c) shall not apply, provided that, in relation to the former family
home (within the meaning of the Family Home Protection Act 1976),the spouse concerned —
(a) has not retained an interest in that home, and
(b) immediately before the date of the deed of separation or
decree concerned is not beneficially entitled to an interestin a dwelling other than the said family home.
(5) Where, having regard to its accomodation needs referred to
insubsection (2)(a) , a household requires to relocate to either a
different dwelling or administrative area or both, subsection (2)(c)
shall not render the household ineligible for an affordable home pur-chase arrangement where the household —
(a) has previously purchased a dwelling under an affordable
dwelling purchase arrangement, or
(b) before the coming into operation of this Part, purchased a
dwelling referred to in section 82(b) or(c).
(6) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b) ,“mortgage ”means a
loan (other than a loan made for the purposes of the purchase of anaffordable dwelling referred to in section 82(d) ) for the purchase of
a dwelling secured by a mortgage in an amount not exceeding 90 percent of the market value of the dwelling.
(7) The Minister may make regulations providing for the means
by which the eligibility of households for an affordable dwelling pur-chase arrangement shall be assessed including, but not necessarilylimited to, the following:
(a) the procedures to be applied by a housing authority for
the purposes of assessing a household ’s eligibility by ref-
erence to income and other financial circumstances hav-ing regard to subsections (2)(b) ,(3),(4)and (5);
97Pt.5 S.84Pt.5 S.84
Scheme of priority
for affordabledwelling purchasearrangements.
98[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) having regard to the different classes of household in the
administrative area concerned and the different classesof dwellings purchased by first-time purchasers in thatadministrative area and the average market value ofthose dwellings, the methodology according to which thehousing authority shall determine, for the purposes ofsubsection (2)(b) , the purchase price of a dwelling suit-
able to a household ’s accommodation needs;
(c) the availability to the household of alternative accom-
modation that would meet its accommodation needs;
(d) any affordable dwelling or other housing support pre-
viously provided by any housing authority to the house-hold which may be taken account of by a housing auth-ority in making an assessment of eligibility under thissection.
85.—(1) A housing authority shall, not later than one year after
the coming into operation of this Part, in accordance with this sectionand regulations made thereunder, make a scheme (in this Partreferred to as a “scheme of priority ”) determining the order of
priority to be accorded to eligible households in relation to —
(a) the sale of affordable dwellings referred to in section 82(a) ,
(b)and (c)where the demand for such dwellings exceeds
the number of such dwellings available for the purposesof this Part, and
(b) the provision of financial assistance under section 81 to
eligible households to purchase open market dwellingswhere the demand for such financial assistance exceedsthe financial resources available to the housing authorityto provide such assistance.
(2) The Minister may make regulations providing for the matters
to be included in a scheme of priority, including the following:
(a) the manner in which affordable dwellings are made avail-
able or, in the case of open market dwellings, financialassistance is provided under section 81 to different classes
of eligible households including —
(i) the nomination of eligible households to dwellings the
subject of a direct sales agreement, and
(ii) the determination of the suitability of the dwellings
by reference to size and location, having regard tothe circumstances of eligible households, includingbut not necessarily limited to, family and financialcircumstances;
(b) the classification of eligible households for the purposes of
subsection (3) ;
(c) the order of priority in accordance with which affordable
dwellings are sold or, in the case of open market dwell-ings, financial assistance is provided under section 81 to
eligible households, including the priority as between eli-gible households who fall within the same classificationreferred to in paragraph (b) , taking account of —[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(i) the period that has elapsed since the eligibility of the
household was assessed under section 84 for an
affordable dwelling purchase arrangement,
(ii) any preferences of the eligible household in respect
of the type of dwelling and its location,
(iii) the income or other financial circumstances of the eli-
gible household, and
(iv) the period for which the eligible household has
resided in the administrative area of the housingauthority;
(d) such other matters as the Minister considers necessary and
appropriate for the purposes of making a scheme ofpriority.
(3) To facilitate the sale of affordable dwellings under this Part
or, in the case of open market dwellings, the provision of financialassistance under section 81 to eligible households, a scheme of
priority shall provide for the classification of eligible households ofsimilar circumstances by reference to the order of priority establishedin accordance with regulations made for the purposes of subsection
(2)(c) .
(4) A housing authority may from time to time review a scheme
of priority and, as it considers necessary and appropriate, amend thescheme or make a new scheme.
(5) The making of a scheme of priority or the amendment of such
a scheme are reserved functions.
(6) The sale of affordable dwellings to eligible households under
this Part and, in the case of open market dwellings, the provisionof financial assistance under section 81 to eligible households are
executive functions.
(7) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of section 98 of the
Planning and Development Act 2000 and section 8 of the Act of2002, a scheme established under the said section 98 or the saidsection 8, as the case may be, and in force immediately before thecoming into operation of this Part continues to have effect after suchcoming into operation and is deemed to have been made under thissection until a scheme of priority made under this section comesinto force.
(8) A housing authority shall make a copy of its scheme of priority
available for inspection by members of the public, without charge,on the Internet and at its offices and such other places, as it considersappropriate, during normal working hours.
(9) Before making or amending a scheme of priority, a housing
authority shall provide a draft of the scheme or amendment to thescheme, as the case may be, to the Minister, who may direct thehousing authority to amend the draft scheme or draft amendment,and the housing authority shall comply with any such direction withinsuch period as may be specified by the Minister.
(10) The Minister may, as he or she considers necessary and
appropriate, direct a housing authority to amend a scheme ofpriority, in such manner as he or she may direct, and the housing
99Pt.5 S.85Pt.5 S.85
Charging order.
Payments by
purchaser duringcharged period.
100[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
authority shall comply with any such direction within such period as
may be specified by the Minister.
86.—(1) As soon as practicable after an affordable dwelling is sold
to an eligible household under an affordable dwelling purchasearrangement, the housing authority shall, subject to such regulationsas may be made under section 95 , make an order (in this Part
referred to as a “charging order ”) charging the dwelling in the terms
specified in this section for the period specified in the order (in thisPart referred to as the “charged period ”) with an amount that shall
be expressed in the order in the following terms.
(2) The terms referred to in subsection (1) are that the amount
charged is —
(a) an amount equal to the difference between the purchase
money and the market value of the dwelling, or
(b) in the case of an open market dwelling, the amount of
financial assistance provided under section 81 to the eli-
gible household,
expressed as a percentage of the market value calculated in accord-
ance with the following formula:
Yx100
Z
where —
(i) Y is —
(I) the difference between the purchase money and
the market value of the dwelling, or
(II) the financial assistance provided under section 81
to the eligible household ,
as the case may be, and
(ii) Z is the market value of the dwelling at the time of
sale to the purchaser.
(3) A charge under subsection (1) shall be discharged by the hous-
ing authority on the earlier of —
(a) subject to section 90 , the first resale of the dwelling, or
(b) subject to section 87 , the repayment in full of the amount
of the charge outstanding under the charging order, or
(c) subject to section 89 , the expiration of the charged period.
87.—(1) A purchaser of a dwelling under an affordable dwelling
purchase arrangement which is subject to a charging order may, sub-ject to subsection (3) , at any time or times after the fifth anniversary
of the date of sale of the dwelling to the purchaser but during thecharged period, make a payment or payments to the housing auth-ority concerned.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(2) Where a purchaser makes a payment under this section the
amount of the charge outstanding under the charging order shall bereduced accordingly in the manner specified in subsection (5) .
(3) A payment made under this section shall not be less than the
amount prescribed for the purposes of this section.
(4) A purchaser who proposes to make a payment under this
section shall notify the housing authority in writing in the prescribedform specifying the amount of the proposed payment.
(5) As soon as practicable but not later than one month after
receipt of a notification under subsection (4) , the housing authority
shall give a written statement to the purchaser —
(a) setting out the market value or, where material improve-
ments have been carried out, the net market value of thedwelling, determined by the housing authority, such val-uation being taken as the prevailing market value or pre-vailing net market value for the purposes of paragraph
(c),
(b) advising the purchaser whether the condition specified in
subsection (3) is satisfied, and
(c) where the condition specified in subsection (3) is satisfied
and taking account of the amount of the proposed pay-ment, setting out the amount of the charge which shallremain outstanding under the charging order followingsuch payment, which amount shall be calculated inaccordance with the following formula:
Y-Z%
where —
(i) Y is the amount of the charge specified in the
charging order or in any previous statement givenunder this subsection, and
(ii) Z is the percentage which the sum paid under subsec-
tion (1) represents of the prevailing market value of
the dwelling or, where material improvements havebeen made to the dwelling by the purchaser, the pre-vailing net market value of the dwelling, referred toinparagraph (a) .
(6) The statement given under subsection (5) is valid for 3 months
from the date thereof and any payment made after the expiry of thatperiod pursuant to that statement shall be treated as a new notifi-cation under subsection (4) and this section shall apply to such notifi-
cation accordingly.
(7) Where the housing authority receives a payment under this
section from the purchaser which is equivalent to the amount of thecharge outstanding under the charging order, the housing authorityshall discharge the charge.
(8) Subject to section 92, wh ere a payment is made under this
section, the housing authority shall be liable for any expenses, includ-ing in respect of the valuation of the dwelling, incurred under thissection.
101Pt.5 S.87Pt.5
Registration of
charging orders andagreements withfinancialinstitutions.
102[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
88.—(1) A charging order shall be deemed to be a mortgage made
by deed within the meaning of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911and to have been executed, at the time of the sale of the dwelling,in favour of the housing authority, for a charge in the terms providedfor in section 86 .
(2) Accordingly, the housing authority shall, as and from the mak-
ing of the charging order, as the case may be —
(a) be deemed to be a mortgagee of the dwelling for the pur-
poses of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911, and
(b) have, in relation to the charge referred to in subsection (1) ,
all the powers conferred by those Acts on mortgageesunder mortgages made by deed.
(3) Where a housing authority makes a charging order, it shall, as
soon as practicable thereafter, cause the order to be registered in theRegistry of Deeds or the Land Registry, as appropriate, and it shallbe a sufficient description of the charge in respect of which the orderis being registered to state that charge to be the charge referred toinsection 86 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 .
(4) A charging order affecting a dwelling which is registered land
within the meaning of the Registration of Title Act 1964 shall beregistrable as a burden affecting such land whether the person namedin the order as the owner of the land is or is not registered under thesaid Act as the owner of the land.
(5) A housing authority may, subject to subsection (6) , enter into
an agreement with a holder of a licence under the Central Bank Act1971, a building society or other financial institution that a chargeproposed to be created by it by a charging order shall have a priority,as against a mortgage or charge proposed to be created in favour ofthat holder, society or institution, that is different from the prioritythe charge would otherwise have if this subsection had not beenenacted.
(6) A housing authority may only enter into an agreement
referred to in subsection (5) if it considers that the agreement will —
(a) enable an eligible household with whom it is proposing to
enter into an affordable dwelling purchase arrangementto obtain an advance of moneys from the holder, societyor institution referred to in subsection (5) for the pur-
poses of purchasing the dwelling, or
(b) enable a purchaser —
(i) to refinance an existing advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(5),o r
(ii) to obtain a further advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(5), for any purpose.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(7) For the avoidance of doubt, neither a charging order nor a
charge that arises under a charging order shall be regarded as a con-veyance for the purposes of section 3 of the Family Home ProtectionAct 1976.
89.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , within 1 month of the expir-
ation of the charged period, the purchaser shall pay to the housingauthority an amount equal to the amount of the charge outstandingunder the charging order on the date of expiration of the chargedperiod.
(2) Where material improvements have been made to the dwell-
ing, the purchaser shall pay to the housing authority an amount equalto that proportion of the net market value of the dwelling as corre-sponds to the amount of the charge outstanding under the chargingorder on the date of expiration of the charged period.
(3) Where the purchaser fails to pay the amount referred to in
subsection (1) or(2), as appropriate, section 91 applies.
90.—(1) Where, before the expiration of the charged period, a
purchaser resells a dwelling which is subject to a charging orderwhich has not been discharged, the purchaser shall pay to the hous-ing authority an amount equal to a percentage of the market value,such percentage being the equivalent of the amount of the chargeoutstanding under the charging order.
(2) Where material improvements have been made to a dwelling
referred to in subsection (1) , the purchaser shall pay to the housing
authority an amount equal to that proportion of the net market valueof the dwelling as corresponds to the amount of the charge outstand-ing under the charging order.
(3) ( a) Subject to paragraph (b) , where a purchaser resells a
dwelling which is subject to a charging order which hasexpired and in respect of which the amount referred toinsection 89(1) or(2), as appropriate, has not been paid
in accordance with that section, section 91 applies.
(b) No account shall be taken of any material improvements
made to the dwelling after the expiration of the chargedperiod.
91.—Any amount that becomes payable to a housing authority
under section 89 or90, as the case may be, may, without prejudice
to any other power in that behalf, be recovered by the authorityfrom the person concerned as a simple contract debt in any court ofcompetent jurisdiction.
92.—(1) For the purposes of sections 86, 87, 89 and90, the market
value of the dwelling concerned shall be determined by the housingauthority or, where the purchaser does not agree with the marketvalue so determined, by an independent valuer nominated by thepurchaser from a panel of suitably qualified persons, established bythe housing authority, who are of a class or description prescribedunder section 95 .
103Pt.5 S.88
Repayment on
expiration ofcharged period.
Control on resale of
dwelling purchasedunder affordabledwelling purchasearrangement.
Recovery of
amounts due tohousing authority.
Valuation of
dwelling for certainpurposes.Pt.5 S.92
Discharge of
charging order.
Affordable
Dwellings Fund.
104[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(2) The housing authority shall not be liable for any expenses
incurred under subsection (1) by a purchaser.
93.—(1) Subject to sections 86 to91and the terms and conditions
of the affordable dwelling purchase arrangement and of the chargingorder having been complied with, the housing authority shall, whererequested to do so by the purchaser, execute a deed of discharge inrespect of the charging order.
(2) The housing authority shall be liable for such expenses as may
be incurred in the execution and registration of a deed of dischargebut shall not otherwise be liable for any expenses incurred by a pur-chaser for the purposes of this section.
94.—(1) There shall stand established, on the coming into oper-
ation of this Part, a fund to be known and in this Act referred to asthe Affordable Dwellings Fund (in this section referred to as the“Fund ”).
(2) Housing authorities shall pay into the Fund —
(a) any moneys paid by purchasers pursuant to section 87 ,89,
90or91,
(b) in the case of dwellings purchased under section 3 of the
Act of 1992 before the coming into operation of this Partand section 7 (in so far as it applies to the said Act and
the Act of 2002), any moneys paid in accordance withsection 10 of the Act of 2002 before the said cominginto operation,
(c) any moneys paid in accordance with section 99(4) of the
Planning and Development Act 2000 before the cominginto operation of this Part and section 7 (in so far as it
applies to the said Act), and
(d) in the case of dwellings purchased under Part 2 of the Act
of 2002 before the coming into operation of this Part andsection 7 (in so far as it applies to the said Act), any
moneys paid in accordance with section 9 of that Actbefore the said coming into operation.
(3) A housing authority may make payments into the Fund from
an account established pursuant to section 96(12) of the Planningand Development Act 2000.
(4) The Minister may, out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas,
pay into the Fund in any financial year such amount as he or shedetermines, with the consent of the Minister for Finance, in relationto that year.
(5) Subject to and in accordance with the Housing Finance
Agency Act 1981 and subsection (6) —
(a) the Housing Finance Agency plc shall manage and control
the Fund,
(b) any moneys in the Fund shall be accounted for in a separ-
ate account of the Housing Finance Agency plc, and[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(c) the Housing Finance Agency plc may advance moneys
from the Fund to housing authorities for the purposes ofproviding housing support under this Act.
(6) The accounts of the Fund shall be in such form and prepared
in such manner as the Minister may determine and shall —
(a) be prepared separately from any other accounts of the
Housing Finance Agency plc, and
(b) shall comprise —
(i) a balance sheet as at the end of the accounting year
duly audited by the auditor of the Housing FinanceAgency plc, and
(ii) an income and expenditure account for the account-
ing year so audited.
(7) The Housing Finance Agency plc shall, where the Minister so
requests, provide an estimate of the projected income of and expen-diture from the Fund for such period as the Minister may specify inthe request.
(8) Where, taking account of any estimate that may be provided
under subsection (7) , the Minister is satisfied that the amount of
moneys in the Fund exceeds the amount required to meet the coststo the Housing Finance Agency plc of borrowing money, in accord-ance with section 10 of the Housing Finance Agency Act 1981, theMinister may distribute any surplus funds to housing authorities forthe purposes specified in subsection (5)(c) .
(9) The administrative costs incurred by the Housing Finance
Agency plc in the management of the Fund shall be met from theFund.
95.—(1) The Minister may make regulations in relation to all or
any one or more of the following:
(a) the class or classes of dwelling in respect of which financial
assistance may be provided to eligible households for thepurposes of section 81 ;
(b) subject to section 84 , the class or classes of households with
whom affordable dwelling purchase arrangements may beentered into;
(c) the minimum and maximum of the amount which may be
charged under a charging order, the maximum of whichshall not in any case exceed 40 per cent of the marketvalue of the dwelling concerned;
(d) the maximum amount of the financial assistance which
may be provided under section 81 to an eligible house-
hold to purchase an open market dwelling under anaffordable dwelling purchase arrangement;
(e) the form and manner of, and the terms and conditions to
be specified in, affordable dwelling purchase arrange-ments, including the following —
105Pt.5 S.94
Regulations ( Part
5).Pt.5 S.95
Transitional
arrangements andsavings provisions.
106[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(i) the provision of mortgage protection insurance, and
(ii) the minimum deposit payable by the household in
respect of the purchase of an affordable dwelling;
(f) the form of a transfer order;
(g) the form and content of a charging order;
(h) the determination of the minimum charged period, or the
range within which a housing authority shall fix the mini-mum charged period, which shall not in any case be lessthan 25 years from the date of sale;
(i) subject to subsection (2) , the amount to be prescribed in
respect of a payment under section 87 ;
(j) the form and manner in which a purchaser shall notify a
housing authority of his or her proposal to make a pay-ment under section 87 ;
(k) the class or classes or description of person who are suit-
ably qualified by reference to their qualifications andexperience to determine the market value of a dwellingfor any of the purposes of this Part;
(l) such other matters as the Minister considers necessary and
appropriate relating to the provision of affordable dwell-ings or affordable dwelling purchase arrangements.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i) , the Minister may pre-
scribe an amount or a percentage of the market value of the dwellingat the time of the payment under section 87 .
96.—(1) Where a household has applied for affordable housing
under Part 2 of the Act of 2002 or Part V of the Planning andDevelopment Act 2000 before the coming into operation of this Part,section 7 (in so far as it applies to the Act of 2002 or the Planning
and Development Act 2000, as the case may be) and section 8 (in so
far as it applies to the Planning and Development Act 2000), and adecision has not been made to allocate a dwelling or site before thesaid coming into operation, the household shall, on the said cominginto operation, be deemed to have applied to purchase an affordabledwelling under an affordable dwelling purchase arrangement and thisPart shall apply accordingly with any necessary modifications.
(2) On the coming into operation of this Part, a housing authority
shall notify in writing each household referred to in subsection (1)
that it considers their application for affordable housing to be anapplication to purchase an affordable dwelling under an affordabledwelling purchase arrangement, and any such household is requiredto notify the housing authority in writing within 3 months of the dateof such notification where the household does not wish to proceedwith the application concerned on that basis.
(3) Where a household applies to a housing authority in respect
of the grant of a shared ownership lease under section 3 of the Actof 1992 before the coming into operation of this Part and section 7
(in so far as it applies to the Act of 1992) and a decision to grant thelease has not been made by the housing authority before the saidcoming into operation, the household shall, on the said coming into[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
operation, be deemed to have applied to purchase an open market
dwelling under an affordable dwelling purchase arrangement and thisPart shall apply accordingly with any necessary modifications.
(4) On the coming into operation of this Part, a housing authority
shall notify in writing each household referred to in subsection (3)
that it considers their application for the grant of a shared ownershiplease under section 3 of the Act of 1992 to be an application topurchase an open market dwelling under an affordable dwelling pur-chase arrangement, and any such household is required to notify thehousing authority in writing within 3 months of the date of suchnotification where the household does not wish to proceed with theapplication concerned on that basis.
(5) Not withstanding the repeal by section 7 of sections 2, 3 and 9
of the Act of 1992 and section 10 of the Act of 2002, those provisionsand any regulations made thereunder shall, after the coming intooperation of section 7 (in so far as it applies to the Act of 1992 and
the Act of 2002), continue to apply to a shared ownership leasesgranted under section 3 of the Act of 1992 before the said cominginto operation of section 7 as if section 7 had not come into operation.
(6) Notwithstanding the repeal by section 7 of sections 98, 99 and
100 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, those provisionsand any regulations made thereunder shall, after the coming intooperation of section 7 (in so far as it applies to the said Act), continue
to apply to affordable housing (within the meaning of that Act) soldor leased under section 98 of that Act before the said coming intooperation of section 7 as if section 7 had not come into operation.
(7) Notwithstanding the repeal by section 7 of sections 6, 8 and 9
of the Act of 2002, those provisions and any regulations madethereunder shall, after the coming into operation of section 7 (in so
far as it applies to the said Act), continue to apply to affordablehouses (within the meaning of that Act) sold before the said cominginto operation of section 7 as if section 7 had not come into operation.
PART 6
PROVISIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN GRANTS
97.—(1) In this section and section 98 —
“market value ”, in relation to a site, means the price for which the
unencumbered fee simple of the site might reasonably be expectedto be sold on the open market;
“qualified purchaser ”means a household which —
(a) has been assessed by a housing authority under section 20
as being qualified for social housing support, or
(b) is a tenant in a dwelling provided by —
(i) a housing authority under the Housing Acts 1966 to
2009 or Part V of the Planning and Development
Act 2000,
(ii) a rental accommodation provider pursuant to a rental
accommodation availability agreement, or
107Pt.5 S.96
Grants in respect of
provision of sitesunder section 57 ofPrincipal Act.Pt.6 S.97
108[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(iii) an approved body,
and includes a person in whom there subsequently becomes vested
(other than for valuable consideration) the interest of the qualifiedpurchaser or his or her successor in title and the personal representa-tive of that person or successor in title;
“site”means a site provided by a housing authority under section 57
of the Principal Act.
(2) The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for Fin-
ance, and subject to such regulations as may be made for the pur-poses of this section, pay to a housing authority out of moneys pro-vided by the Oireachtas a grant of such amount as the Minister maydetermine in respect of —
(a) the provision by the authority of a site to an approved
body for —
(i) the erection, other than by or on behalf of a housing
authority, of a dwelling or dwellings for the purposesof letting to households assessed under section 20 as
being qualified for social housing support, or
(ii) the erection of a dwelling or dwellings for the pur-
poses of sale to qualified purchasers,
or
(b) the provision of a site to a qualified purchaser.
(3) The amount of a grant payable by the Minister under subsec-
tion (2) , may be used to defray all or any of the following costs
incurred by the housing authority —
(a) site acquisition costs including loan interest and other
related costs,
(b) costs of works necessary for or incidental to the develop-
ment of the site for the purposes of the erection of thedwelling or dwellings, and
(c) professional, legal and any other costs incurred by the
authority in relation to the provision of the site.
(4) The Minister may make regulations providing for, in part-
icular, but without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) , all
or any one or more of the following:
(a) the terms and conditions subject to which a grant may be
made under this section, including terms and conditionsrelating to the ownership of a site provided by a housingauthority to an approved body for the purposes specifiedinsubsection (2)(a) ;
(b) the means of determining the purchase price of a site hav-
ing regard to its market value;
(c) the range of the amount of the grant paid for the purposes
ofsubsection (2)(a)(i) , having regard to the location of
the site and the type of dwelling to be erected on the site;[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(d) the maximum grant payable for the purposes of paragraph
(a)(ii) or(b)ofsubsection (2) ;
(e) requirements in relation to the payment of the grant
including, but not necessarily limited to, terms and con-ditions relating to —
(i) the use of the dwelling as the qualified purchaser ’s
normal residence, and
(ii) repayments to a housing authority under section 98 ;
(f) requirements in relation to standards of construction and
works.
98.—(1) This section applies to a site provided by a housing auth-
ority to a qualified purchaser at a purchase price less than themarket value.
(2) Where a site to which this section applies, including a site with
a dwelling thereon, is first resold before the expiration of 20 yearsfrom the date of the sale of the site to a qualified purchaser, thevendor shall pay to the housing authority an amount equal to a per-centage of the market value of the site only at the date of the resale,calculated in accordance with subsection (3) .
(3) The percentage referred to in subsection (2) is calculated in
accordance with the following formula —
Y x 100
Z
where —
(a) Y is the difference between the market value of the site at
the date of the sale to the qualified purchaser and theprice actually paid, and
(b) Z is the market value of the site at the date of the sale to
the qualified purchaser.
(4) The amount payable under subsection (2) shall be reduced by
10 per cent in respect of each complete year after the tenth yearduring which the purchaser has been in possession of the site.
(5) Where the amount payable under subsection (2) would, if sub-
tracted from the market value of the site at the date of its resale,result in an amount that is less than the price actually paid for thesite, the amount payable shall be reduced to the extent necessary toavoid that result.
(6) As soon as practicable after a site to which this section applies
is sold to a qualified purchaser, the housing authority shall make anorder charging the site with an amount that shall be expressed in theorder in the terms set out in subsection (7) .
(7) The terms referred to in subsection (6) are that the amount
charged is an amount equal to the amount (if any) that may sub-sequently become payable under subsection (2) in respect of the site.
109Pt.6 S.97
Control on resale of
certain sites ordwellings thereon.Pt.6 S.98
110[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(8) An order under subsection (6) shall be deemed to be a mort-
gage made by deed within the meaning of the Conveyancing Acts1881 to 1911 and to have been executed, at the time of the sale ofthe site to the qualified purchaser, in favour of the housing authorityfor a charge of the amount referred to in subsection (7) .
(9) Accordingly, the housing authority shall, as on and from the
making of such an order —
(a) be deemed to be a mortgagee of the site for the purposes
of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911, and
(b) have in relation to the charge referred to in subsection (8) ,
all the powers conferred by those Acts on mortgageesunder mortgages made by deed.
(10) Where a housing authority makes an order under subsection
(6), it shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, cause the order to be
registered in the Registry of Deeds or the Land Registry, as appro-priate, and it shall be a sufficient description of the amount in respectof which the charge to which the order relates is being registered tostate that amount to be the amount referred to in section 98(7) of
theHousing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009.
(11) An order under subsection (6) affecting a site to which this
section applies which is registered land within the meaning of theRegistration of Title Act 1964 shall be registrable as a burden affect-ing such land whether the person named in the order as the ownerof the land is or is not registered under the said Act as the owner ofthe land.
(12) A housing authority may, subject to subsection (13) , enter
into an agreement with a holder of a license under the Central BankAct 1971, a building society or other financial institution that acharge proposed to be created by it by an order under subsection (6)
shall have a priority, as against a mortgage or charge proposed to becreated in favour of that holder, society or institution, that is differ-ent from the priority the charge would otherwise have if this subsec-tion had not been enacted.
(13) A housing authority may only enter into an agreement
referred to in subsection (12) if it considers that the agreement will —
(a) enable a qualified purchaser to whom it is proposing to sell
a site to which this section applies to obtain an advance ofmoneys from the holder, society or institution referredto in subsection (12) for the purposes of purchasing the
site, or
(b) enable a qualified purchaser who purchased a site to which
this section applies —
(i) to refinance an existing advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(12),o r
(ii) to obtain a further advance of moneys from the
holder, society or institution referred to in subsection
(12), for any purpose.
(14) Any amount that becomes payable to a housing authority
under subsection (2) may, without prejudice to any other power in[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
that behalf, be recovered by the authority from the person concerned
as a simple contract debt in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(15) For the avoidance of doubt, neither an order under subsec-
tion (6) nor a charge that arises under it shall be regarded as a con-
veyance for the purposes of section 3 of the Family Home ProtectionAct 1976.
(16) For the purposes of this section, the current market value of
a site to which this section applies shall be determined by the housingauthority, or, where the vendor does not agree with the market valueso determined, by an independent valuer nominated by the vendorfrom a panel of suitably qualified persons, established by the housingauthority, who are of a class or description prescribed under section
49.
(17) The housing authority shall not be liable for any expenses
incurred by a vendor under subsection (16) .
99.—(1) This section applies to a grant paid to a person under
article 5 of the Housing (Adaptation Grants for Older People andPeople with a Disability) Regulations 2007 (S.I. No. 670 of 2007), forthe purpose of providing additional accommodation, pursuant to anapplication received by a housing authority on or after such date asmay be prescribed.
(2) ( a) Where a dwelling in respect of which a grant was paid is
sold before the expiration of 5 years from the date ofpayment of the grant, the vendor shall pay to the housingauthority an amount equal to a percentage of the grant.
(b) The percentage referred to in paragraph (a) is—
(i) 85 per cent of the grant paid where less than one year
has passed since the date of payment of the grant,
(ii) 70 per cent of the grant paid where one year or more
but less than 2 years has passed since the date ofpayment of the grant,
(iii) 50 per cent of the grant paid where 2 years or more
but less than 3 years has passed since the date ofpayment of the grant,
(iv) 35 per cent of the grant paid where 3 years or more
but less than 4 years has passed since the date ofpayment of the grant, and
(v) 20 per cent of the grant paid where 4 years or more
but less than 5 years has passed since the date ofpayment of the grant.
(3) As soon as practicable after the grant is paid to a person, the
housing authority shall make an order charging the dwelling with anamount that shall be expressed in the order in the terms set out insubsection (4) .
(4) The terms referred to in subsection (3) are that the amount
charged is an amount equal to the amount (if any) that may sub-sequently become payable under subsection (2) in respect of the
dwelling.
111Pt.6 S.98
Repayment of
adaptation grant.Pt.6 S.99
Amendments to
ResidentialTenancies Act 2004.
112[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(5) An order under subsection (3) shall be deemed to be a mort-
gage made by deed within the meaning of the Conveyancing Acts1881 to 1911 and to have been executed, at the time of the makingof the grant, in favour of the housing authority for a charge of theamount referred to in subsection (4) .
(6) Accordingly, the housing authority shall, as on and from the
making of an order under subsection (3) —
(a) be deemed to be a mortgagee of the dwelling for the pur-
poses of the Conveyancing Acts 1881 to 1911, and
(b) have, in relation to the charge referred to in subsection (5) ,
all the powers conferred by those Acts on mortgageesunder mortgages made by deed.
(7) Where a housing authority makes an order under subsection
(3), it shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, cause the order to be
registered in the Registry of Deeds or the Land Registry, as appro-priate, and it shall be a sufficient description of the amount in respectof which the charge to which the order relates is being registered tostate that amount to be the amount referred to in section 52(4) of
theHousing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 .
(8) An order under subsection (3) affecting a dwelling which is
registered land within the meaning of the Registration of Title Act1964 shall be registrable as a burden affecting such land whether theperson named in the order as the owner of the land is or is notregistered under that Act as the owner of the land.
(9) Any amount that becomes payable to a housing authority
under subsection (2) , may, without prejudice to any other power in
that behalf, be recovered by the authority from the person concernedas a simple contract debt in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(10) For the avoidance of doubt, neither an order under subsec-
tion (3) nor a charge that arises under it shall be regarded as a con-
veyance for the purposes of section 3 of the Family Home ProtectionAct 1976.
PART 7
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES ACT
2004
100.—(1) In this section “Act of 2004 ”means the Residential
Tenancies Act 2004.
(2) Section 3 of the Act of 2004 is amended —
(a) in subsection (2)( c)(ii), by substituting “a household within
the meaning of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act 2009 assessed under section 20 of that Act as being
qualified for social housing support ”for “a person
referred to in section 9(2) of the Housing Act 1988 ”, and
(b) by inserting the following subsection:
“(3) Notwithstanding the definition of “tenancy ”in
section 5(1), in this section a reference to a tenancy does[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
not include a tenancy the term of which is more than 35
years. ”.
(3) Section 12 of the Act of 2004 is amended —
(a) in subsection (1), by inserting the following after para-
graph ( b):
“(ba) provide receptacles suitable for the storage of
refuse outside the dwelling, save where theprovision of such receptacles is not within thepower or control of the landlord in respect ofthe dwelling concerned, ”,
(b) in subsection (4)( a), by substituting the following for sub-
paragraph (i):
“(i) the payment of rent, or any other charges
or taxes payable by the tenant in accord-ance with the lease or tenancy agreement,and the amount of rent or such othercharges or taxes in arrears is equal to orgreater than the amount of the deposit,or”,
and
(c) by substituting the following for subsection (4)( b):
“(b) where, at the date of the request for return or
repayment, there is a default in —
(i) the payment of rent, or any other charges
or taxes payable by the tenant in accord-ance with the lease or tenancy agree-ment, or
(ii) compliance with section 16( f),
and subparagraph (i) or (ii), as the case may
be, of paragraph ( a) does not apply, then there
shall only be required to be returned or repaidunder subsection (1)( d) the difference between
the amount of rent or such other charges ortaxes in arrears or, as appropriate, the amountof the costs that would be incurred in takingsteps of the kind referred to in paragraph(a)(ii). ”.
(4) Section 135 of the Act of 2004 is amended —
(a) by deleting subsection (2), and
(b) in subsection (5), by substituting “that the application is
incomplete and invalid and shall return the application,any other information submitted with the application andany fee paid ”for“of the omission concerned and afford
him or her a reasonable opportunity to rectify thematter ”.
(5) The Act of 2004 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 147:
113Pt.7 S.100Pt.7 S.100
114[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
“Disclosure of
certaininformation toRevenueCommissioners.147A. —The Board shall, at such intervals as are
specified by the Revenue Commissioners, discloseto the Revenue Commissioners information con-tained in the register the disclosure of which to theRevenue Commissioners is reasonably necessaryfor the performance by the Revenue Commis-sioners of their functions. ”.
(6) The amendment provided for in subsection (2)(b) does not
affect any matter referred to the Private Residential TenanciesBoard for resolution under Part 6 of the Act of 2004 before thecoming into operation of this section.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
SCHEDULE 1
Repeals
Item Number Short Title Extent of Repeal
and Year
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1 No. 21 of Housing Act 1966 Sections 56, 58 and 61
1966
2 No. 28 of Housing Act 1988 Sections 8, 9, 11, 14, 15 and 20
1988
3 No. 18 of Housing (Miscellaneous Sections 2, 3 and 9
1992 Provisions) Act 1992
4 No. 30 of Planning and Develop- Sections 98, 99 and 100
2000 ment Act 2000
5 No. 9 of Housing (Miscellaneous Sections 6, 8, 9, 10 and 14
2002 Provisions) Act 2002
SCHEDULE 2
Consequential Amendments
PART 1
Amendments to Housing Act 1966
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 90 Insert the following after subsection (4):
“(4A) Section 211(2) of the Planning and
Development Act 2000 shall not apply to the sale of adwelling under subsection (1)( a)(i).”.
2 Section Substitute “at the rate at which on the date of the
107(7) undertaking the authority could borrow from the
Housing Finance Agency for the purposes of housepurchase loans which are subject to a variable interestrate”for“at a rate specified in the undertaking, being
the rate at which on the date of the undertaking theauthority could borrow from the local loans fund ”.
115Section 7.
Section 8.Sch. 2
116[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
PART 2
Amendments to Housing Finance Agency Act 1981
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 4(2) ( a) In paragraph (c), delete “and”.
(b) Insert the following after paragraph (c):
“(ca) to manage the Affordable Dwellings
Fund established under Part 5 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 in accordance with that Act and any
regulations made by the Minister underthat Act,
(cb) to advance moneys from the said
Affordable Dwellings Fund to housingauthorities for any purpose authorised byor under section 94 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 , and ”.
2 Section 5 ( a) In paragraph ( c), delete “or”.
(b) In paragraph ( d), substitute “body, or ”for
“body. ”.
(c) Insert the following after paragraph ( d):
“(e) a housing authority from the Affordable
Dwellings Fund established under Part 5
of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act 2009 subject to and in accordance with
that Act and any regulations made by theMinister under that Act, for any purposeauthorised by or under section 94 of that
Act”.
3 Section 10(3) Substitute “\10,000,000,000 ”for“\6,000,000,000 ”.
PART 3
Amendments to Housing Act 1988
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 12 ( a) In subsection (1), insert “and (8) ”after “subsection
(2)”.
(b) Insert the following after subsection (7):
“(8) ( a) This section shall not apply to
apartments in a designated apartmentcomplex.
(b) For the purposes of paragraph (a) ,
“apartments ”and “designated apartment
complex ”have the same meaning as they
have in section 50 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009.
2 Section 13 In subsection (3), substitute “Section 11 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 ”for“Section 56(2)
of the Principal Act ”.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
PART 4
Amendments to Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 1(1) Insert the following definitions:
“‘improvement notice ’has the meaning given to it by
section 18A;
‘prohibition notice ’has the meaning given to it by section
18B; ”.
2 Section 5 In subsection (2), substitute the following for paragraph
(a):
“(a) who has been assessed under section 20 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 as
being qualified for social housing support, but onlyif by exercising those functions the authority issatisfied that the person ’s need for such support
will be met or obviated, or ”.
3 Section 18 ( a) In subsection (1) —
(i) delete “, works and services appurtenant
thereto and enjoyed therewith ”, and
(ii) after “let”to insert “or available for letting ”.
(b) Delete subsections (3) to (6).
(c) In subsection (7)( b), insert “and any common areas ”
after “house ”.
(d) In subsection (7):
(i) in paragraph ( g) substitute “food; ”for
“food. ”, and
(ii) insert the following after paragraph ( g):
“(h) fire safety. ”.
(e) Substitute the following for subsection (8):
“(8) For the purposes of subsection (7)( b)‘a
proper state of structural repair ’means sound,
internally and externally, with roof, roofing tilesand slates, windows, floors, ceilings, walls, stairs,doors, skirting boards, fascia, tiles on any floor, ceil-ing and wall, gutters, down pipes, fittings, fur-nishings, gardens and common areas maintained ingood condition and repair and not defective due todampness or otherwise. ”.
(f) Insert the following after subsection (8):
“(9) In this section and sections 18A and 18B —
‘common areas ’means common areas, works and
services that are appurtenant to houses and enjoyedtherewith and that are in the ownership or underthe control of the landlord;
‘landlord ’means the person for the time being
entitled to receive (otherwise than as agent foranother person) the rent paid in respect of a houseby the tenant thereof;
117Sch. 2Sch. 2
118[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
‘tenancy ’includes a periodic tenancy and a tenancy
for a fixed term, whether oral or in writing orimplied;
‘tenant ’means the person for the time being
entitled to the occupation of a house under atenancy. ”.
4 New sections Insert the following new sections after section 18:
“Improvement notice.
18A. —(1) Where, in the opinion of a housing authority,
a landlord is contravening or has contravened a require-ment of a regulation made under section 18, the authoritymay give notice in writing (in this Act referred to as an“improvement notice ”) to the landlord of the house
concerned.
(2) An improvement notice shall —
(a) state that the housing authority is of the
opinion referred to in subsection (1),
(b) state the reasons for that opinion,
(c) identify the provision of the regulation con-
cerned in respect of which that opinion isheld,
(d) direct the landlord to remedy the contra-
vention within the period specified in thenotice commencing on the date specifiedtherein, which date shall not be earlier thanthe end of the period within which an objec-tion may be submitted under subsection (6),
(e) include information regarding the submission
of an objection and the making of an appealin relation to the notice, specifying —
(i) the form and manner of an objection,(ii) the form and manner of an appeal, and(iii) the address of the housing authority for
the purpose of submitting an objectionunder subsection (6) or notifying theauthority of an appeal under subsection(7), as the case may be,
(f) contain a statement that if an objection is not
submitted in accordance with subsection (6)and within the period specified in that sub-section then —
(i) the notice will be treated as not disputed,
and
(ii) the landlord will be deemed to have
accepted the notice and to have agreedto comply with the direction within theperiod specified therein,
and
(g) be signed and dated by the housing authority.
(3) An improvement notice may include directions as to
the measures to be taken to remedy the contravention towhich the notice relates or to otherwise comply with thenotice.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
(4) Where an improvement notice is given under subsec-
tion (1), the housing authority shall give a copy to the ten-ant of the house concerned.
(5) ( a) A landlord to whom an improvement notice has
been given who is of the opinion that theimprovement notice has been complied withshall, before the expiration of the periodspecified in the notice for the purpose ofsubsection (2)( d), confirm in writing to the
housing authority that the matters referredto in the notice have been so remedied andshall give a copy of the confirmation to thetenant.
(b) Where a landlord confirms to the housing
authority in accordance with paragraph ( a)
that the matters referred to in the improve-ment notice have been remedied, the hous-ing authority, on being satisfied that thematters have been so remedied, shall, within28 days of receiving such confirmation, givenotice in writing to the landlord of com-pliance with the improvement notice andshall give a copy of the notice to the tenant.
(c) The notice under paragraph ( b) does not pre-
clude any inspection which the housing auth-ority considers necessary in relation to thehouse concerned or the service of a furtherimprovement notice which the authoritymay consider necessary.
(6) A landlord aggrieved by an improvement notice
may, within 14 days beginning on the day on which thenotice is given to him or her, submit an objection to thenotice in the form and manner specified in the notice, andthe housing authority shall consider the objection and, asit sees fit, vary, withdraw, cancel or confirm the notice andshall notify the landlord in writing of the decision and thereasons for the decision within 14 days after receipt ofthe objection.
(7) ( a) The landlord may, no later than 14 days after
the decision under subsection (6) is notifiedby the housing authority to him or her,appeal the decision to a judge of the DistrictCourt in the district court district in whichthe notice was served.
(b) A landlord who appeals under paragraph ( a)
shall at the same time notify the housingauthority in writing of the appeal and thegrounds for the appeal.
(c) The housing authority shall be entitled to
appear, be heard and adduce evidence onthe hearing of the appeal.
(d) In determining an appeal under paragraph ( a),
the judge of the District Court may confirm,vary or cancel the improvement notice if heor she considers it reasonable to do so.
(8) Where an objection is submitted under subsection
(6) and no appeal is made under subsection (7) againstthe decision of the housing authority and the improvementnotice is neither withdrawn nor cancelled, the notice takeseffect on the later of the following:
(a) the day after the day on which the notice is
confirmed or varied;
119Sch. 2Sch. 2
120[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
(b) the day after the objection is withdrawn by
the landlord;
(c) the date specified in the notice.
(9) Where an appeal is made under subsection (7) and
the improvement notice is neither withdrawn nor can-celled, the notice takes effect on the later of the following:
(a) the day after the day on which the notice is
confirmed or varied on appeal;
(b) the day after the appeal is withdrawn by the
landlord;
(c) the date specified in the notice.
(10) Where no objection is submitted under subsection
(6) the improvement notice takes effect on the date speci-fied in the notice.
(11) The housing authority may —
(a) withdraw an improvement notice at any time,
or
(b) where no objection is submitted or appeal
made or pending, extend the date specifiedin the notice for the purposes of subsection(2)(d).
(12) Withdrawal of an improvement notice under sub-
section (11) does not prevent the giving of anotherimprovement notice, whether in respect of the same matteror a different matter.
Prohibition notice.
18B. —(1) Where a landlord fails to comply with an
improvement notice in accordance with section 18A, thehousing authority may give notice in writing (in this Actreferred to as a “prohibition notice ”) to the landlord of the
house concerned.
(2) A prohibition notice shall —
(a) state that the housing authority is of the
opinion that the landlord has failed to com-ply with an improvement notice,
(b) direct that the landlord shall not re-let the
house for rent or other valuable consider-ation until the landlord has remedied thecontravention to which the improvementnotice relates,
(c) include information regarding the making of
an appeal in relation to the notice,specifying —
(i) the form and manner of an appeal, and(ii) the address of the housing authority for
the purpose of notifying the authority ofan appeal under subsection (4),
and
(d) be signed and dated by the housing authority.
(3) Where a prohibition notice is given under subsection
(1), the housing authority shall give a copy to the tenantof the house concerned.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
(4) ( a) A landlord aggrieved by a prohibition notice
may, within 14 days beginning on the day onwhich the notice is given to him or her,appeal the notice to a judge of the DistrictCourt in the district court district in whichthe notice was served.
(b) A landlord who appeals under paragraph ( a)
shall at the same time notify the housingauthority in writing of the appeal and thegrounds for the appeal.
(c) The housing authority shall be entitled to
appear, be heard and adduce evidence onthe hearing of the appeal.
(d) In determining an appeal under paragraph ( a),
the judge of the District Court may confirm,vary or cancel the prohibition notice if he orshe considers it reasonable to do so.
(5) A prohibition notice shall take effect —
(a) in the case of an appeal under subsection (4),
on the later of the following:
(i) the day after the day on which the notice
is confirmed or varied on appeal;
(ii) the day after the appeal is withdrawn by
the landlord;
(iii) the expiry, whether by termination or
otherwise, of the tenancy existing on theday on which the prohibition notice isgiven to the landlord,
(b) in any other case on the later of the following:
(i) the day after the expiry of the period
allowed by subsection (4)( a) for making
an appeal;
(ii) the expiry, whether by termination or
otherwise, of the tenancy existing on theday on which the prohibition notice isgiven to the landlord.
(6) A landlord to whom a prohibition notice has been
given who is of the opinion that the matters to which thenotice relates have been remedied shall confirm in writingto the housing authority that those matters have been soremedied and shall give a copy of the confirmation to thetenant.
(7) Where a landlord on whom a prohibition notice has
been served confirms in writing to the housing authority inaccordance with subsection (6) that the matters to whichthe notice relates have been remedied, the housing auth-ority, on being satisfied that the matters have been so rem-edied, shall, within 28 days of such confirmation, give writ-ten notice to the landlord of compliance with theprohibition notice and shall give a copy of the notice to thetenant of the house concerned.
(8) A housing authority may at any time withdraw a
prohibition notice by notice in writing to the landlord towhom it was given.
121Sch. 2Sch. 2
122[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
(9) Withdrawal of a prohibition notice under subsection
(8) does not prevent the giving of another prohibitionnotice.
(10) A housing authority shall, in the interests of public
health and safety, make such arrangements as they con-sider appropriate or necessary to bring the contents of aprohibition notice to the attention of the public. ”.
5 Section 23 Substitute the following for subsections (1) and (2):
“(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), a reference in
the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 , to a housing authority
means, in the case of —
(a) a county, the county council,
(b) a city, the city council,
(c) a borough mentioned in Chapter 1 of Part 1
of Schedule 6 to the Act of 2001, except asrespects —
(i) section 6 of the Act of 1979,(ii) sections 2 to 4, 6 and 7 of this Act,(iii) Part 2 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2002, and
(iv) sections 14 to18and Chapter 6 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ,
the borough council and, as respects each of those
sections, the county council in whose administrativearea the borough is situate,
(d) a town mentioned in Chapter 2 of Part 1 of
Schedule 6 to the Act of 2001, except asrespects —
(i) section 6 of the Act of 1979,(ii) section 16 of the Act of 1988,(iii) sections 2 to 4, 6, 7 and 11 of this Act,(iv) Part 2 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2002, and
(v)sections 14 to18and Chapter 6 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ,
the town council and, as respects each of those
sections, the county council in whose administrativearea the town is situate,
(e) a town mentioned in Part 2 of Schedule 6 to
the Act of 2001, except as respects —
(i) sections 34 to 36 and section 41 of the Prin-
cipal Act,
(ii) section 6 of the Act of 1979,(iii) sections 2, 6, 10, 13 and 16 of the Act of
1988,
(iv) sections 2 to 7, 10 to 12, 14, 17, 18, 20, 34
and 35 of this Act,[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
(v) Part 2 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2002, and
(vi) sections 14 to18and Chapter 6 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ,
the town council and, as respects each of those
sections, the county council in whoseadministrative area the town is situate,
and references to the functional area of a housing
authority shall be construed accordingly.
(2) A reference in the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 to a
housing authority means, in the case of —
(a) the boroughs of Drogheda, Sligo and Wexford,
except as respects —
(i) section 6 of the Act of 1979,(ii) sections 6 and 7 of this Act, and(iii) sections 14 to18and Chapter 6 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ,
the respective borough councils and, as respects
each of those sections, the respective countycouncils in whose administrative areas thoseboroughs are situate,
(b) the town of Bray, except as respects —
(i) section 6 of the Act of 1979,(ii) sections 2 to 4, 6 and 7 of this Act,(iii) Part 2 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2002, and
(iv) sections 14 to18and Chapter 6 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ,
the town council and, as respects each of those
sections, the county council in whoseadministrative area that town is situate,
(c) the towns of Athlone and Dundalk, except as
respects —
(i) section 6 of the Act of 1979,(ii) sections 6 and 7 of this Act, and(iii) sections 14 to18and Chapter 6 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ,
the respective town councils and, as respects each
of those sections, the respective county councils inwhose administrative areas those towns aresituate,
and references to the functional area of a housing
authority shall be construed accordingly. ”.
6 Section 34 ( a) Substitute the following for subsection (1) —
“(1) Any person who —
(a) by act or omission, obstructs an authorised
123Sch. 2Sch. 2
124[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
person in the lawful exercise of the powersconferred by, or contravenes a provision of,or a regulation made under, section 17, 18 or20, or
(b) fails to comply with an improvement notice, or
(c) re-lets a house in breach of a prohibition
notice,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on sum-
mary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or impris-
onment for a term not exceeding 6 months or both and ifthe obstruction, contravention, failure to comply or re-let-ting is continued after conviction the person shall be guiltyof a further offence on every day on which the obstruction,contravention, failure to comply or re-letting continues andfor each such offence shall be liable, on summary convic-tion, to a fine not exceeding \400.”.
(b) Insert the following subsection:
“(3) Where a person is convicted of an offence
under this Act, the court shall, unless it is satisfiedthat there are special and substantial reasons fornot doing so, order the person to pay to the housingauthority, the costs and expenses, measured by thecourt, incurred by the housing authority in relationto the investigation, detection and prosecution ofthe offence. ”.
PART 5
Amendments to Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1997
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 1(1) ( a) In paragraph ( b) of the definition of “anti-social
behaviour ”—
(i) insert “alarm ”after “damage ”, and
(ii) substitute the following for the words from
“includes ”to the end of the paragraph:
“(i) violence, threats, intimidation, coercion,
harassment or serious obstruction ofany person,
(ii) behaviour which causes any significant or
persistent impairment of a person ’s use
or enjoyment of his or her home, or
(iii) damage to or defacement by writing or
other marks of any property, includinga person ’s home; ”.
(b) In the definition of “tenant ”insert the following
after “2000 ”:
“or to whom a dwelling is let under a Chapter
4 tenancy agreement (within the meaning oftheHousing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2009 )”.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
2 Section 3(1) Insert the following after paragraph ( a):
“(aa) let to a tenant under a Chapter 4 tenancy
agreement, or ”.
3 Section Substitute “section 30 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
4A(b) Provisions) Act 2009 ”for“section 9 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992 ”.
4 Section 14 ( a) In subsection (1) —
(i) delete the words from “Notwithstanding ”
down to and including “where ”and
substitute the following:
“Notwithstanding anything contained in
theHousing Acts 1966 to 2009 ,o ri na n
allocation scheme made under section 22 of
theHousing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2009 , a housing authority may refuse to
allocate or defer the allocation of adwelling, including a dwelling the subjectof a rental accommodation availabilityagreement (within the meaning of thatAct), to a person where ”,
(ii) in paragraph ( a), substitute “an allocation ”
for“a letting ”, and
(iii) in paragraph ( b), substitute “an allocation ”
for“an application for the letting ”.
(b) Substitute the following for subsection (2):
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in —
(a)Part 3 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 or an incremental
purchase arrangement under the said Part
3,
(b)Part 4 of the said Act, or
(c)Part 5 of the said Act or an affordable
dwelling purchase arrangement under thesaid Part 5 ,o r
(d) section 90 of the Housing Act 1966 (inserted
by section 26 of the Housing(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992) or apurchase scheme under the said section 90,
a housing authority may refuse to sell a dwelling to —
(i) in the case of an incremental purchase
arrangement, an eligible household (withinthe meaning of Part 3 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 ),
(ii) in the case of Part 4 of the said Act, a
tenant,
(iii) in the case of an affordable dwelling
purchase arrangement, an eligiblehousehold (within the meaning of Part 5 of
the said Act), or
(iv) in the case of section 90 of the Housing Act
1966, a tenant,
where the authority considers that the said tenant or the
said eligible household or any member of the eligiblehousehold or of the tenant ’s household, as the case may
125Sch. 2Sch. 2
126[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
be, is or has been engaged in anti-social behaviour or thata sale to that eligible household or tenant would not be inthe interest of good estate management. ”.
5 Section 15 Substitute the following for subsection (2):
“(2) A housing authority may, for the purposes
of any of their functions under the Housing Acts
1966 to 2009 or Part V of the Planning and
Development Act 2000, request from anotherhousing authority or a specified person,information in relation to any person —
(a) seeking a house or site from the authority or
seeking to occupy a caravan on a site orresiding or proposing to reside at a houseprovided by the authority or by anapproved body, including a house thesubject of a rental accommodationavailability agreement, or seeking orreceiving any other housing support (withinthe meaning of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 ) under the Housing
Acts 1966 to 2009 ,o r
(b) whom the authority considers may be or may
have been engaged in anti-social behaviour,
and, notwithstanding anything contained in any
enactment, such other housing authority orspecified person may provide the information tothe housing authority requesting it. ”.
PART 6
Amendments to Housing (Traveller Accommodation) Act 1998
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 6 ( a) Substitute the following for subsection (1):
“(1) A relevant housing authority shall, for the
purposes of preparing a programme under section7, and at such other times as the Minister may bydirection specify, in respect of the functional areaconcerned, make an assessment of theaccommodation needs of travellers who areassessed under section 20 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 as being
qualified for social housing support (within themeaning of that Act), including the need forsites. ”.
(b) Delete subsection (2).
(c) Substitute the following for subsection (3):
“(3) Before making an assessment under this
section, a relevant housing authority shall giveone month ’s notice of their intention to do so
to—
(a) every local authority whose administrative
area adjoins, or is contained in, thefunctional area of the authority preparinga programme under section 7,[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
(b) the Health Service Executive,
(c) approved bodies engaged in the provision of
accommodation or shelter in the functionalarea concerned,
(d) any local consultative committee in the
functional area concerned, and
(e) such local community bodies in the
functional area concerned and any otherperson, as the housing authority considersappropriate. ”.
(d) In subsection (4), insert the following after
paragraph ( a):
“(aa) any summary of social housing
assessments prepared under section
21(c) of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009, ”.
(e) In subsection (6), substitute “in relation to any
summary of social housing assessments referred toin subsection 4( aa), furnish such information ”for
“in relation to an assessment made by it under
section 9 of the Act of 1988, furnish from theassessment such information ”.
(f) Delete subsection (7).
2 Section 10(2) ( a) In paragraph ( a), delete the words from “and any ”
to the end of the paragraph.
(b) In paragraph ( b), substitute “in the most recent
summary of social housing assessments preparedby a housing authority under section 21(c) of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 ”for
“in the most recent assessment made by a housing
authority under section 9 of the Act of 1998 ”.
PART 7
Amendments to Planning and Development Act 2000
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section 93 ( a) Substitute the following for subsection (1):
“(1) In this Part —
‘housing strategy ’means a strategy included in a
development plan in accordance with section 94(1);
‘market value ’, in relation to a house, means the
price which the unencumbered fee simple of thehouse would fetch if sold on the open market;
‘mortgage ’means a loan for the purchase of a house
secured by mortgage in an amount not exceeding 90per cent of the price of the house.
(b) Delete subsections (2) and (3).
2 Section 94 ( a) In subsection (2), substitute “summary of social
housing assessments prepared under section 21(a)
of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
127Sch. 2Sch. 2
128[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
2009 ”for“housing assessment or assessments made
under section 9 of the Housing Act, 1988,
(b) In subsection 4 —
(i) in paragraph ( a), substitute the following for
subparagraphs (i) and (ii):
“(i) housing for the purposes of the provision
of social housing support within themeaning of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 , and
(ii) housing for eligible households (within the
meaning of section 78 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 ,”,
and
(ii) delete paragraph ( b),
(c) In subsection (5)( a), insert the following after
subparagraph (v):
“(va) the number of households who have
applied to purchase an affordable dwellingunder an affordable dwelling purchasearrangement pursuant to Part 5 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act2009 ;”.
3 Section 96 ( a) Substitute the following for subsection (12) —
“(12) Any amount referred to in subsection (11)
and any amount paid to a planning authority inaccordance with subsection (3)( b)(vi), (vii) or (viii)
shall be accounted for in a separate account andshall only be applied as capital for its functions inrelation to the provision of housing under the Hous-
ing Acts 1966 to 2009 , including the making of pay-
ments under section 94 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 into the Afford-
able Dwellings Fund established under Part 5 of
that Act. ”.
(b) In subsection (13)( a), substitute “required for
households assessed under section 20 of the
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 as
being qualified for social housing support ”for“for
persons referred to in section 9(2) of the HousingAct, 1988 ”.
PART 8
Amendment to Civil Registration Act 2004
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section Substitute the following for subparagraph (ii) —
66(1)( j)
“(ii) the determination of a rent or other payment under
section 31 of the Housing (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009 ,o r”.[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
PART 9
Amendment to Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section Substitute the following for subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii)
265(1) of paragraph ( b) of the definition of “relevant purpose ”—
“(i) carrying out a social housing assessment under section
20of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 ,
(ii) allocating a dwelling under section 22 of the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 ,
(iii) determining rent or any other charge under section 31
of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2009 ,”.
SCHEDULE 3
Terms and Conditions of Tenancy Agreement
The following terms and conditions shall be included in every ten-
ancy agreement:
(a) the name of the tenant, or where there is more
than one tenant, the names of those tenants;
(b) the terms of the letting including restrictions on
its purchase and occupation and conditions pro-hibiting vacating, subletting, assignment orotherwise parting with possession of the dwell-ing or any part of it;
(c) conditions relating to, and procedures for,
termination of the tenancy including for breachof any of the terms or conditions of the ten-ancy agreement;
(d) details of the rent and any other charges payable,
including procedures for rent review;
(e) the times at which rent and any other charges are
payable and the manner of their payment;
(f) the procedures for recovering arrears, together
with any interest payable thereon, of rent or anyother charges payable;
(g) the obligations of a tenant relating to mainten-
ance in good repair and condition of the dwell-ing or site, including restrictions on the keepingof animals, the erection of signage or otherwiseadapting or altering the dwelling;
(h) restrictions on any change of use of the dwelling;
(i) provision for such access as may reasonably be
required by officers or agents authorised by the
129Sch. 2
Section 29.Sch. 3
Section 73.
130[No. 22.] [2009.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
housing authority for the purpose of the per-
formance by the housing authority of its func-tions under the Housing Acts 1966 to 2009 ;
(j) the obligations of a tenant to avoid any nuisance
to the occupiers of any other dwelling;
(k) the procedures which apply where a tenant
wishes to transfer to another dwelling providedby the authority;
(l) terms and conditions —
(i) relating to anti-social behaviour, in or in the
vicinity of the dwelling, by a tenant or anymember of his or her household or anyother person residing at or lawfully in thedwelling, and
(ii) prohibiting the tenant from knowingly per-
mitting a person, against whom an exclud-ing order under section 3 of the Act of 1997or an interim excluding order under section4 of that Act is in force in respect of thedwelling concerned, to enter the dwellingin breach of the excluding order or interimexcluding order, as the case may be.
SCHEDULE 4
Information to be Included in Property Services Agreement
A property services agreement shall include —
1. The name and address of the specified body
2. The name and registered office of the management company3. Details of the designated apartment complex the subject matter
of the agreement
4. Particulars of the services to be provided by the specified body
under the agreement, including property management services andthe provision of staff
5. The amount of the fee or fees payable by the management com-
pany under the agreement and the circumstances in which the fee orfees become payable the procedures relating to collection the fee orfees, including procedures for the collection of any such fee in thecase of non-payment by the management company
6. The period during which the agreement is to have effect7. The length of notice to be given in the event of termination of
the agreement by the housing authority or management company
8. Details of professional indemnity insurance of the specified
body[2009.] [ No. 22.] Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
9. Details of the records to be kept by the specified body in
respect of the provision of the services under the agreement
10. Complaints and redress procedures put in place by the speci-
fied body
11. A timetable for delivery of services under the agreement12. Particulars of out-of-hours services for emergencies13. Reporting obligations of the specified body to the manage-
ment company.
131Sch. 4