————————
Number 13of2009
————————
FINANCIAL SERVICES (DEPOSIT GUARANTEE SCHEME)
ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definitions.
2. Amount of coverage in respect of eligible deposits.3. Deposit protection account.4. Amount to be maintained in deposit protection account.5. Annual recalculation of amount of deposit.6. Charges, etc., on deposit protection account.7. Aggregate payment to deposit protection account by credit
unions.
8. Reimbursement from Central Fund of certain payments by
Bank.
9. Offence and penalty.
10. Regulations.11. Amendments to Central Bank Act 1942.12. Short title and commencement.
SCHEDULE
Amendments to Central Bank Act 1942
————————
12[No. 13.] [2009.]Financial Services (Deposit Guarantee
Scheme) Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
Building Societies Act 1989 1989, No. 17
Central Bank Act 1942 1942, No. 22Central Bank Act 1971 1971, No. 24Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Act 2003 2003, No. 12
Credit Union Act 1997 1997, No. 15European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 25Markets in Financial Instruments and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act 2007 2007, No. 37————————
Number 13of2009
————————
FINANCIAL SERVICES (DEPOSIT GUARANTEE SCHEME)
ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE MAKING OF REGU-
LATIONS REGARDING THE AMOUNT PAYABLE TO APERSON MAINTAINING ELIGIBLE DEPOSITS WITH ACREDIT INSTITUTION; TO PROVIDE FOR THE MAIN-TENANCE OF THE DEPOSIT PROTECTION ACCOUNTBY THE CENTRAL BANK AND FINANCIAL SERVICESAUTHORITY OF IRELAND; TO PROVIDE FOR THEMAINTENANCE BY CREDIT INSTITUTIONS OFDEPOSITS IN THE DEPOSIT PROTECTION ACCOUNT;TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMOUNT OF THE DEPOSITAND ITS VARIATION; TO GIVE FURTHER EFFECT TODIRECTIVE 94/19/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIA-MENT AND OF THE COUNCIL OF 30 MAY 1994 ONDEPOSIT GUARANTEE SCHEMES; TO AMEND THECENTRAL BANK ACT 1942 AND TO PROVIDE FORRELATED MATTERS.
[18th June , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Bank” means the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority
of Ireland;
“credit institution” means—
(a) a credit union,
(b) a building society incorporated under the Building Societ-
ies Act 1989 (No. 17 of 1989), or deemed by section124(2) of that Act to be so incorporated, that is author-ised to accept deposits under section 27 of that Act, or
(c) a bank licensed under section 9 of the Central Bank Act
1971 (No. 24 of 1971);
“credit union” means a society registered as such under the Credit
Union Act 1997 and includes a society deemed to be so registeredby virtue of section 5(3) of that Act;
3Definitions.S.1
Amount of
coverage in respectof eligible deposits.
Deposit protection
account.
Amount to be
maintained indeposit protectionaccount.
4[No. 13.] [2009.]Financial Services (Deposit Guarantee
Scheme) Act 2009 .
“Deposit Guarantee Regulations” means the European Communi-
ties (Deposit Guarantee Schemes) Regulations 1995 (S.I. No. 168 of1995) or any regulations replacing those regulations;
“Directive” means Directive 94/19/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 30 May 1994 on deposit guarantee schemes
1or
any directive amending or replacing that Directive;
“eligible deposit” has the same meaning as in the Deposit Guaran-
tee Regulations;
“Minister” means the Minister for Finance.
2.—Where the Minister—
(a) makes regulations to give effect to the Directive, and
(b) after consulting with the Bank, considers it necessary in
the public interest and in the interest of the proper andorderly regulation of credit institutions to make thoseregulations in accordance with this section,
until 31 December 2010 the Minister may by those regulations pre-
scribe, as the amount of coverage to be provided for the aggregatedeposits of a person maintaining a deposit with a credit institution,an amount greater than the minimum amount necessary to be pre-scribed from time to time to give effect to the Directive as adjustedunder Article 7(7) of the Directive.
3.—The account established and maintained by the Bank immedi-
ately before the coming into operation of this section and known asthe deposit protection account shall continue to be maintained bythe Bank and to be known by that name.
4.—(1) A credit institution shall not carry on the business of a
credit institution unless it maintains on deposit with the Bank in thedeposit protection account—
(a) such amount as may be prescribed from time to time by
the Minister by regulations made in accordance with sub-
section (3) ,o r
(b) where a notification is received by a credit institution
under subsection (6) of a variation under subsection (2) ,
the amount specified therein.
(2) ( a) The Minister may, in accordance with subsection (3) ,b y
written instrument vary the amount prescribed undersubsection (1) in respect of a credit institution or credit
institutions or a class or classes of credit institution.
(b) The Minister may amend or revoke a variation made
under this subsection.
(3) Where the Minister proposes to make regulations under sub-
section (1) or a variation under subsection (2) , he or she—
(a) shall consult with the Bank,
1OJ No. L135, 31.5.1994, p.1[2009.] [ No. 13.] Financial Services (Deposit Guarantee
Scheme) Act 2009 .
(b) shall have regard to such advice as the Bank may give in
respect to the matters specified in subsection (4) , and
(c) may have regard to such other matters as he or she or the
Bank considers appropriate.
(4) The matters in respect of which the Bank may advise the Mini-
ster for the purposes of subsection (3) relating to a credit institution
or credit institutions or a class or classes of credit institution includethe following:
(a) the nature, scale and complexity of the business and the
associated level of risk;
(b) the level of capital and liquidity;
(c) the adequacy of internal controls, including procedures
relating to risk management and mitigation and arrange-ments for financial stabilisation;
(d) the capacity to fund the proposed deposit.
(5) A variation under subsection (2) shall be notified in writing by
the Minister to the Bank.
(6) The Bank shall notify in writing the credit institution or credit
institutions concerned of a variation under subsection (2) as soon as
practicable after receiving a notification under subsection (5) .
(7) A variation under subsection (2) shall take effect from the
date specified in the relevant instrument.
(8) The Bank may settle the amount of a deposit by a credit insti-
tution in the deposit protection account at the nearest round figurein hundreds of euro.
(9) The Bank shall determine from time to time—
(a) the rate at which deposits by credit institutions in the
deposit protection account shall carry interest, and
(b) the manner in which, and the time or times at which, that
interest is payable.
5.—(1) The amount of the deposit by a credit institution in the
deposit protection account under section 4 shall, after the initial cal-
culation, be recalculated annually by the Bank for each credit insti-tution or class of credit institutions by reference to the returns madeby credit institutions at the direction of the Bank.
(2) The amount of the deposit shall, where necessary, be amended
to the appropriate amount recalculated under subsection (1) , by the
credit institution concerned, not later than 7 days, or such longerperiod as the Bank may agree in writing, after the date of receipt byit of notification in writing from the Bank of the amount required toeffect the amendment.
6.—(1) Any charge purported to be created, other than by the
Bank, on a deposit by a credit institution in the deposit protectionaccount is void.
5S.4
Annual
recalculation ofamount of deposit.
Charges, etc., on
deposit protectionaccount.S.6
Aggregate payment
to depositprotection accountby credit unions.
Reimbursement
from Central Fundof certain paymentsby Bank.
Offence and
penalty.
Regulations.
6[No. 13.] [2009.]Financial Services (Deposit Guarantee
Scheme) Act 2009 .
(2) A deposit by a credit institution in the deposit protection
account shall not be subject to any form of execution in satisfactionof any claim, or any judgment, order or decree of any court in theState in favour of any creditor, otherwise than under and in accord-ance with the provisions of the Deposit Guarantee Regulations.
7.—A group or groups of credit unions may, subject to the prior
approval of the Minister, make an aggregate payment or paymentson behalf of each credit union which is a member of such a group insatisfaction of the amount of a deposit in the deposit protectionaccount.
8.—(1) If the Bank charges on the deposit protection account any
payment out of the Bank’s own funds in accordance with the DepositGuarantee Regulations, the amount of the payment shall, with theapproval of the Minister, be repaid to the Bank out of the CentralFund or the growing produce of that Fund within 3 months.
(2) Any amount paid out of the Central Fund to the Bank under
subsection (1) shall be repaid to the Central Fund from the deposit
protection account (with interest at the rate or rates that the Ministerdetermines, or without interest).
(3) The Minister shall determine the period over which the pay-
ment required by subsection (2) is to be made, taking account of the
amount owing and the ability of the deposit protection account tomake that repayment.
9.—(1) A person who contravenes section 4(1) commits an
offence and is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or,
at the discretion of the court, to imprisonment for a termnot exceeding 12 months, or both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\250,000 or, at the discretion of the court, to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 3 years, or both.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body cor-
porate and is proved to have been so committed with the consent orconnivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of,any person, being a director, manager, secretary or other officer ofthe body corporate, or a person who is purporting to act in suchcapacity, that person, as well as the body corporate, is guilty of anoffence and is liable to be proceeded against and punished as if heor she were guilty of the first-mentioned offence.
(3) Proceedings for a summary offence under this Act may be
brought and prosecuted by the Bank.
10.—(1) Every regulation under this Act shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the regulation is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after the regu-lation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulled accordinglybut without prejudice to the validity of anything previously doneunder the regulation.[2009.] [ No. 13.] Financial Services (Deposit Guarantee
Scheme) Act 2009 .
(2) Regulations under this Act may contain such incidental, sup-
plementary and consequential provisions as appear to the Ministerto be necessary or expedient for the purposes of the regulations.
(3) The Deposit Guarantee Regulations may be amended as if
made under this Act.
11.—The Central Bank Act 1942 is amended as set out in the
Schedule.
12.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Financial Services (Deposit
Guarantee Scheme) Act 2009.
(2) Section 4 , in so far as it applies to credit unions, shall come
into operation on such day as the Minister may appoint by order.
SCHEDULE
Amendments to Central Bank Act 1942
Item Provision Amendment
affected
(1) (2) (3)
1 Section ( a) In paragraph ( al), substitute “functions, or” for
33AK(5) (as “functions.”.amended by
(b) Insert the following after paragraph ( al): section 13 of
the Markets
“(am) to a deposit guarantee scheme in another in Financial
Member State of the European Communities Instruments
(including a state that is a contracting party to and
the EEA Agreement (within the meaning given Miscellaneous
by the European Communities (Amendment) Provisions
Act 1993)) established in accordance with Act 2007)
Directive 94/19/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 30 May 1994 on depositguarantee schemes.”.
2 Schedule 2 In Part 2, by deleting the following:
(inserted by
“ section 31 of
the CentralS.I. No. 168 European The wholeBank andof 1995 Communities instrumentFinancial(DepositServicesGuaranteeAuthority ofSchemes)Ireland ActRegulations2003)1995
”.
7S.10
Amendments to
Central Bank Act1942.
Short title and
commencement.
Section 11.