————————
Number 19of2007
————————
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary Matters
Section
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation and application.3. Regulations.4. Repeals.5. Expenses.
PART 2
National Consumer Agency
Chapter 1
The Agency
6. Establishment day.
7. Establishment of Agency.8. Functions of Agency.9. Review of legislation.
10. Membership of Agency.11. Chairperson of Agency.12. Meetings and procedures of Agency.13. Committees.14. Chief executive.15. Functions of chief executive.
12[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
16. Attendance of chief executive before Committee of Public
Accounts.
17. Attendance of chief executive before other Oireachtas
Committees.
18. Membership of either House of the Oireachtas, European
Parliament or local authority.
19. Indemnity for members of Agency.20. Strategy statement and work programme of Agency.21. Provision for co-operation between Agency and certain pre-
scribed bodies.
22. Reports and information to Minister.23. Accounts and audits.24. Advances by Minister to Agency.25. Disclosure of interests.26. Power to enter into contracts and to engage consultants and
advisers.
27. Premises of Agency.28. Seal of Agency.29. Power to borrow.30. Authorised officers of Agency.31. Disclosure of information relating to offences.
32. Prohibition on unauthorised disclosure of information.33. Amendment of Freedom of Information Act 1997.
Chapter 2
Staff of Agency
34. Staffing.35. Transfer of employment of certain persons to Agency.36. Superannuation.
Chapter 3
Transfer of Functions, etc.
37. Transfer of functions to Agency.38. Preservation of existing contracts.
39. Transfer of assets and liabilities.40. References in certain other enactments to Director or Office
of Director.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
PART 3
Commercial Practices
Chapter 1
Unfair Commercial Practices
41. General prohibition on unfair commercial practices.
Chapter 2
Misleading Commercial Practices
42. General prohibition on misleading commercial practices.43. Misleading: false, misleading or deceptive information.44. Misleading: competitor or product confusion in marketing
or advertising.
45. Misleading: non-compliance with commitment under code of
practice by which trader is bound.
46. Misleading: withholding, omitting or concealing material
information.
47. Offence: misleading commercial practices.48. Prohibition on surcharges where one method of payment
chosen in preference to another.
49. Requirement that surcharge (where otherwise permissible)
be stated as part of price.
50. Consumer information regulations.
51. Offences: contravening consumer information regulations.
Chapter 3
Aggressive Commercial Practices
52. General prohibition on aggressive commercial practices.53. Aggressive commercial practices.54. Offence: aggressive commercial practices.
Chapter 4
Prohibited Commercial Practices
55. Prohibited commercial practices.56. Offence: prohibited commercial practices.57. Price display regulations.58. Offence: price display contraventions.59. Offence: weighing facilities in grocery retail.60. Offence: preventing the reading of prices.
61. State of emergency affecting supply of a product.
34[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
62. Power to fix maximum prices during state of emergency.
63. Offence: contravening maximum price orders.
PART 4
Pyramid Promotional Schemes
64. Definition ( Part 4 ).
65. Indictable offence: participating in, establishing, operating or
promoting pyramid promotional schemes.
66. Pyramid promotional scheme agreements void.
PART 5
Proceedings, Remedies and Penalties
Chapter 1
Interpretation and General Matters related to Proceedings
67. Definition ( Part 5 ).
68. Presumption respecting representations.69. Advertisers.70. Offence of trader due to act or default of another person.
Chapter 2
Civil Proceedings
71. Civil relief by way of prohibition orders.72. Prohibition orders against code owners.73. Undertakings with the Agency.74. Consumer’s right of action for damages.
Chapter 3
Compliance Notices
75. Compliance notices.
Chapter 4
Criminal Proceedings
76. Time limit for instituting proceedings.
77. Liability for offences by bodies corporate.78. Defence of due diligence.79. Fines and penalties.80. Convicted persons liable for costs and expenses of pro-
ceedings and investigation.
81. Convicted traders liable to compensate consumers for loss
or damage.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
82. Court may order convicted person to publish corrective
statement.
83. Summary trial of persons indicted.84. Agency may institute summary proceedings for offences.
Chapter 5
Fixed Payment Notices
85. Fixed payment notices for price display and product pricing
offences.
Chapter 6
Publication of Trader Names (Consumer Protection List)
86. Agency may publish information respecting certain persons.
PART 6
Miscellaneous
87. Protections for persons reporting breaches.
88. Voluntary submission of codes for Agency review and
approval.
89. Admissibility of codes of practice in proceedings.90. Agency guidelines.91. Saving for certain contracts.92. Saving of current price display orders.93. Transitional.94. Amendment of Central Bank Act 1942.95. Amendment of Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act
1980.
96. Saving for other rights person may have.97. Amendment of Industrial Development Act 1993.
98. Amendment of Casual Trading Act 1995.99. Amendment of Hallmarking Act 1981.
100. Power of officer of customs and excise to detain unsafe
goods.
101. Directions under certain instruments respecting product
safety: actions of third parties.
102. Admissibility of certain laboratory tests.
56[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 1
Existing Enactments
PART 1
Enactments —Acts of the Oireachtas
PART 2
Enactments made under the European Communities Act 1972
which are existing Enactments
SCHEDULE 2
Repeals
SCHEDULE 3
References in Certain Acts and Instruments to Director or
Office of Director
PART 1
References in Certain Acts to Director of Consumer Affairs
or Office of the Director of Consumer Affairs
PART 2
References in Certain Instruments to Director of Consumer
Affairs or Office of the Director of Consumer Affairs
SCHEDULE 4
Enactments for the purpose of section 73(Undertakings with
the Agency)
SCHEDULE 5
Enactments for the purpose of section 75(Compliance notices)
SCHEDULE 6
Redress for contravention of section 87
SCHEDULE 7
Statutory Instruments for the purposes of sections 101and 102
(Directions respecting product safety and admissibility of
laboratory tests)
SCHEDULE 8
Directives for the purpose of section 102(Admissibility of
laboratory tests)
————————[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Agricultural Produce (Fresh Meat) Act 1930 1930, No. 10
Agricultural Produce (Potatoes) Act 1931 1931, No. 26Anglo-Portuguese Commercial Treaty Act 1914 5 & 6 Geo. 5., c. 1Anglo-Portuguese Commercial Treaty Act 1916 6 & 7 Geo. 5., c. 39Carer’s Leave Act 2001 2001, No. 19Casual Trading Act 1995 1995, No. 19Central Bank Act 1942 1942, No. 22Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Act 2003 2003, No. 12
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Act 2004 2004, No. 21
Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33Competition Act 2002 2002, No. 14Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 8Consumer Credit Act 1995 1995, No. 24Consumer Information Act 1978 1978, No. 1Criminal Procedure Act 1967 1967, No. 12Electronic Commerce Act 2000 2000, No. 27European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 25European Communities Act 1972 1972, No. 27European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act 1998 1998, No. 29Freedom of Information Act 1997 1997, No. 13Hallmarking Act 1981 1981, No. 18Industrial Development Act 1986 1986, No. 9Industrial Development Act 1993 1993, No. 19Interpretation Act 2005 2005, No. 23Investment Funds, Companies and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions Act 2006 2006, No. 41
Liability for Defective Products Act 1991 1991, No. 28Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Merchandise Marks Act 1887 50 & 51 Vic., c. 28Merchandise Marks Act 1891 54 & 55 Vic., c. 15Merchandise Marks Act 1911 1 & 2 Geo. 5., c. 31Merchandise Marks Act 1931 1931, No. 48Merchandise Marks Act 1970 1970, No. 10Merchandise Marks Acts 1887 to 1978Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005
National Archives Act 1986 1986, No. 11National Standards Authority of Ireland Act 1996 1996, No. 28Occasional Trading Act 1979 1979, No. 35Official Languages Act 2003 2003, No. 32Ombudsman Act 1980 1980, No. 26Ombudsman for Children Act 2002 2002, No. 22Organisation of Working Time Act 1997 1997, No. 20Packaged Goods (Quantity Control) Act 1980 1980, No. 11Package Holidays and Travel Trade Act 1995 1995, No. 17Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006Pawnbrokers Act 1964 1964, No. 31
78[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Personal Injuries Assessment Board Act 2003 2003, No. 46
Portuguese Treaty Act 1930 1930, No. 35Prices (Amendment) Act 1972 1972, No. 20Prices Act 1958 1958, No. 4Prompt Payment of Accounts Act 1997 1997, No. 31Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act 2003 2003, No. 29Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001 2001, No. 45Pyramid Selling Act 1980 1980, No. 27Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003Restrictive Practices (Amendment) Act 1987 1987, No. 31Road Traffic Act 1968 1968, No. 25Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act 1980 1980, No. 16Seed Production Act 1955 1955, No. 14Spanish Trade Agreement Act 1936 1936, No. 6Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39Terms of Employment (Information) Act 1994 1994, No. 5Terms of Employment (Information) Acts 1994 and 2001Trading Stamps Act 1980 1980, No. 23Unfair Dismissals Act 1977 1977, No. 10Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005Veterinary Practice Act 2005 2005, No. 22————————
Number 19of2007
————————
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE UNFAIR COMMERCIAL
PRACTICES DIRECTIVE (DIRECTIVE NO. 2005/29/EC OFTHE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THECOUNCIL OF 11 MAY 2005), TO ESTABLISH A BODY TOBE KNOWN AS AN GHNI ´OMHAIREACHT NA ´ISIU´NTA
TOMHALTO ´IRI´OR, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE,
THE NATIONAL CONSUMER AGENCY AND TODEFINE ITS FUNCTIONS, TO MAKE NEW PROVISIONIN RELATION TO PYRAMID SELLING SCHEMES, TOAMEND THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ACT 1993AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[21st April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary Matters
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Consumer Protection Act
2007.
(2) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or different provisions,including the application of section 4 to different enactments speci-
fied in Schedule 2 and to different provisions of those enactments.
2.—(1) In this Act—
“advertisement” includes any form of advertising or marketing;“Agency” means the National Consumer Agency established by
section 7 ;
“authorised officer” means a person appointed under section 30 ;
“chief executive” means the chief executive officer of the Agency;
9Short title and
commencement.
Interpretation and
application.Pt.1S . 2
10[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
“code of practice” means any code, agreement or set of rules or
standards that is not imposed by or under an enactment but purportsto govern or define commercial practices of one or more traders(whether generally or in respect of a particular trade, business orprofessional sector or one or more commercial practices) who agree,commit or undertake to abide or be bound by such rules orstandards;
“commercial practice” means any conduct (whether an act or
omission), course of conduct or representation by the trader inrelation to a consumer transaction, including any such conduct orrepresentation made or engaged in before, during or after the con-sumer transaction;
“consumer” means a natural person (whether in the State or not)
who is acting for purposes unrelated to the person’s trade, businessor profession;
“consumer transaction” means a promotion or supply of a product
to a consumer;
“contravene”, in relation to a provision, includes fail to comply with
the provision;
“Directive” means Directive No. 2005/29/EC of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 11 May 2005
1concerning unfair business-
to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and amend-ing Council Directive 84/450/EEC, Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council andRegulation (EC) No. 2006/2004 of the European Parliament and ofthe Council;
“Director” means the Director of Consumer Affairs;
“enactment” means an Act (within the meaning of the Interpretation
Act 2005) or any instrument made under a power conferred by anAct (within that meaning);
“establishment day” means the establishment day appointed under
section 6 ;
“existing enactments” means the following enactments, to the extent
to which those enactments confer functions on the Director whichare transferred to the Agency pursuant to section 37:
(a) food legislation, within the meaning of the Food Safety
Authority of Ireland Act 1998;
(b) the enactments specified in Part 1 ofSchedule 1 and any
instruments made under those enactments for the timebeing in force; and
(c) the regulations made under the European Communities
Act 1972 for the time being in force specified in Part 2 of
Schedule 1 ;
“financial year” means a period of 12 months ending on 31
December in any year and, in the case of the first financial year ofthe Agency, means the period commencing on the establishment dayand ending on 31 December in the year in which the establishmentday falls;
1O.J. No. L.149, 11/06/2005, p. 22.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
“goods” means real or personal property of any nature or descrip-
tion, and includes—
(a) ships, aircraft or other vehicles,
(b) animals,
(c) minerals, trees or crops, whether on, under or attached to
land or not,
(d) gas, electricity or water,
(e) computer software,
(f) tickets or like evidence of a right to be in attendance at a
particular place at a particular time or times or a rightof transportation,
(g) any voucher, coupon or other document or thing intended
to be used as a substitute for money in the payment, inwhole or in part, for a product or otherwise exchangedfor a product, and
(h) any description of interest (present or future, vested or
contingent) or obligation arising out of or incidental togoods;
“goods or services” means goods or services or both;
“invitation to purchase” means a representation by the trader in a
consumer transaction that—
(a) indicates characteristics of the product and includes its
price, and
(b) enables the consumer to purchase the product;
“Minister” means the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and
Employment;
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Minister;“product” means goods or services;“public body” means—
(a) a board, authority or other body, other than a company
under the Companies Acts, established by or understatute;
(b) a company under the Companies Acts in which all the
shares are held—
(i) by or on behalf of a Minister of the Government, or
(ii) by directors appointed by a Minister of the
Government;
(c) a company under the Companies Acts in which all the
shares are held by a board, authority or body referred toinparagraph (a) or by a company referred to in para-
graph (b) ;
11Pt.1S . 2Pt.1S . 2
12[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
“purchase” means to buy, obtain or acquire by any method and
includes accept, receive, be vested with, lease, take possession, con-trol or occupation of, and agree to do any of those things (but doesnot include expropriate);
“relevant State” means a state that is a contracting State to the EEA
Agreement within the meaning of the European Communities(Amendment) Act 1993;
“relevant statutory provisions” means—
(a) existing enactments,
(b) the Merchandise Marks Act 1970 and any instruments
made under that Act for the time being in force,
(c) certain provisions of the Prices Act 1958 referred to in
section 92 and the enactments specified in subsection
(1)(a) to(e)of that section to the extent to which they
remain in force for the purposes of this Act,
(d) the enactments specified in subsection (1)(a) to(c)of
section 93 , and
(e) this Act and any instrument made under this Act for the
time being in force;
“representation” includes—
(a) any oral, written, visual, descriptive or other represen-
tation by a trader, including any commercial communi-cation, marketing or advertising, and
(b) any term or form of a contract, notice or other document
used or relied on by a trader in connection with a con-sumer transaction;
“services” means any service or facility provided for gain or reward
or otherwise than free of charge, including, without limitation—
(a) services or facilities for—
(i) banking, insurance, grants, loans, credit or financing,
(ii) amusement, cultural activities, entertainment, instruc-
tion, recreation or refreshment,
(iii) accommodation, transport, travel, parking or stor-
age, or
(iv) the care of persons, animals or things,
(b) membership in a club or organisation or any service or
facility provided by the club or organisation, and
(c) any rights, benefits, privileges, obligations or facilities that
are, or are to be provided, granted or conferred in thecourse of services,
but does not include services provided under a contract of
employment;[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
“supply”, in relation to the supply of goods or services to a con-
sumer, includes—
(a) sell, lease, take by way of mortgage or other security,
assign, award by chance or otherwise effect a dispositionof,
(b) offer or agree to supply or expose or display for supply;
“trader” means—
(a) a person who is acting for purposes related to the person’s
trade, business or profession, and
(b) a person acting on behalf of a person referred to in para-
graph (a) ;
“transactional decision” means, in relation to a consumer trans-
action, any decision by the consumer concerning whether, how or onwhat terms to do, or refrain from doing, any of the following:
(a) purchase the product;
(b) make payment in whole or in part for the product;
(c) retain or return the product after its purchase;
(d) dispose of the product;
(e) exercise a contractual right in relation to the product;
“voluntary body” means—
(a) a body corporate, or
(b) an unincorporated body of persons,
other than a public body.
(2) In this Act, “the average consumer” has the meaning assigned
to it in the Directive, and when applied in relation to a particularcommercial practice or product of a trader—
(a) if the commercial practice or product is directed at a part-
icular group of consumers, the expression shall be readas “the average member of that group”, and
(b) if the commercial practice or the product is a practice or
product that would be likely to materially distort theeconomic behaviour only of a clearly identifiable groupof consumers whom the trader could reasonably beexpected to foresee as being particularly vulnerablebecause of their mental or physical infirmity, age or cred-ulity, the expression shall be read as “the averagemember of that vulnerable group”.
(3) A word or expression that is used in this Act and is also used
in the Directive shall have in this Act the same meaning as it has inthe Directive.
(4) A court shall construe this Act in a manner that gives effect
to the Directive, and for this purpose the court shall have regard tothe provisions of the Directive, including its preambles.
13Pt.1S . 2Pt.1S . 2
Regulations.
Repeals.
Expenses.
Establishment day.
14[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(5) Notwithstanding Article 3(10) of the Directive but subject to
sections 5 to 6A (inserted by section 99 ) of the Hallmarking Act
1981, Part 3 applies to commercial practices relating to indications
of the standard of fineness of articles of precious metal.
3.—(1) The Minister may make regulations in relation to any
matter referred to in this Act as prescribed or to be prescribed.
(2) Every regulation or order (other than an order under section
1or6) made under this Act shall be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if a resolutionannulling the regulation or order is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after the regu-lation or order is laid before it, the regulation or order shall beannulled accordingly, but without prejudice to the validity of any-thing previously done under it.
(3) The power to make regulations under this section includes the
power to make provision in such regulations to give effect to—
(a) a provision of the treaties of the European Communities,
or
(b) an act adopted by an institution of those Communities
which regulates any of the matters to which this Actapplies.
4.—(1) Each enactment specified in Schedule 2 is repealed to the
extent specified in column (3) of that Schedule.
(2) Section 20(5)( b) of the National Standards Authority of
Ireland Act 1996 is amended by deleting “the Merchandise MarksActs 1887 to 1978, and”.
(3) The following are revoked:
(a) the Prices (Stabilisation of Profit Margins of Retailers of
Motor Cars) Order 1984 (S.I. No. 223 of 1984);
(b) the Consumer Information (Diesel and Petrol) (Reduction
in Retail Price) Order 1997 (S.I. No. 179 of 1997).
5.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of monies provided by the Oireachtas.
PART 2
National Consumer Agency
Chapter 1
The Agency
6.—The Minister shall by order appoint a day to be the establish-
ment day for the purposes of this Act.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
7.—(1) On the establishment day there shall stand established a
body to be known as an Ghnı ´omhaireacht Na ´isiu´nta Tomhalto ´irı´or,
in the English language, the National Consumer Agency and in thisAct referred to as the Agency, to perform the functions conferredon it by this Act.
(2) The Agency shall be a body corporate with perpetual suc-
cession and an official seal and shall have power—
(a) to sue, and may be sued, in its corporate name,
(b) to acquire, hold and dispose of land or an interest in land,
with the approval of the Minister given with the consentof the Minister for Finance, and
(c) to acquire, hold and dispose of any other property, with
the approval of the Minister given with the consent of theMinister for Finance.
(3) Subject to this Act, the Agency shall be independent in the
performance of its functions.
8.—(1) The functions of the Agency are—
(a) to promote and protect the interests and welfare of
consumers,
(b) to enforce the relevant statutory provisions, including by
the prosecution of offences, by way of summary pro-ceedings,
(c) to encourage compliance with the relevant statutory
provisions,
(d) to investigate instances of suspected offences under any of
the relevant statutory provisions,
(e) at its discretion, to refer cases to the Director of Public
Prosecutions where the Agency has reasonable groundsfor believing that an indictable offence under any of therelevant statutory provisions has been committed.
(2) This section and the other provisions of this Part are without
prejudice to section 94 (respecting the concurrent vesting in the Cen-
tral Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland of certain func-tions under this Act).
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , in per-
forming its functions under this Act, the Agency—
(a) may, and shall when requested by the Minister, advise and,
as appropriate, make recommendations to the Govern-ment, the Minister, any other Minister of the Govern-ment or any Minister of State, in relation to any proposalsfor legislative change, or any other policy matters, con-cerning, or which would be likely to impact on, consumerprotection and welfare,
(b) may, and shall when requested by the Minister, and after
consultation with such persons as it considers appropriatehaving regard to the proposals to be submitted, submit tothe Minister, any other Minister of the Government or
15Pt.2
Establishment of
Agency.
Functions of
Agency.Pt.2S . 8
16[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
any Minister of State any proposals it considers appro-
priate for amendment of any enactment, or for newenactments, concerning consumer protection and welfare,
(c) shall advise and, as appropriate, make recommendations
to the Government, the Minister, any other Minister ofthe Government, any Minister of State, any public bodyor any prescribed body within the meaning of section 21
in relation to any matter concerning, or which the Agencyconsiders would be likely to impact on, consumer protec-tion and welfare,
(d) shall foster and promote contacts, co-operation and the
exchange of information with and shall consult with con-sumer groups and representatives,
(e) shall co-operate with other competent authorities whether
in the State or elsewhere charged with responsibility forthe enforcement of laws relating to consumer protectionand welfare or the promotion of consumer protectionand welfare,
(f) shall promote the development of alternative dispute res-
olution procedures as a means of resolving disputes aris-ing out of consumer transactions,
(g) shall conduct or commission research, studies and analysis
on matters relating to the functions of the Agency and,as it considers appropriate, publish in the form and man-
ner that the Agency thinks fit, such findings as it con-siders appropriate,
(h) shall promote public awareness and conduct public infor-
mation campaigns for the purpose of educating and advis-ing consumers in relation to consumer protection andwelfare,
(i) shall promote educational initiatives and activities relating
to consumer information and awareness and advise, whenrequested, the Minister or any other Minister of theGovernment, Departments of State or any public bodywhose activities are concerned with matters relating toany of the purposes of this Act, and any educational ortraining institution,
(j) for the purposes of performing its functions under para-
graphs (g) to(i), may, through the provision of financial
or other resources, support the activities relating to con-sumer protection and welfare of such voluntary bodies asthe Agency considers appropriate,
(k) shall review and approve codes of practice in accordance
with section 88,
(l) shall prepare and publish guidelines to traders in accord-
ance with section 90,
(m) shall promote and encourage the establishment by a trader
or traders, whether generally or in respect of a particularservice or services, of quality assurance schemes, that isto say schemes the purpose of which is—[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(i) to maintain and improve the quality and reliability of
the service or services provided to consumers, and
(ii) to enable consumers to identify traders who meet the
requirements of the scheme concerned,
(n) shall perform the functions assigned to the Director under
the existing enactments and transferred to the Agencypursuant to section 37 .
(4) The Agency shall have all such powers as are necessary or
expedient for the performance of its functions.
(5) The Agency may delegate the performance of any of its func-
tions to any member of the Agency or to any member of its staff,including the chief executive, duly authorised in that behalf by theAgency.
(6) Nothing in this section or any other provision of this Act
imposes a duty on the Agency to consider whether to investigate amatter relating to Part 3 that is referred to it by a trader but the
Agency may, in the case of a matter so referred to it, considerwhether to do so (and, accordingly, may proceed to investigate thematter) where it is satisfied the matter may affect the interests andwelfare of consumers.
9.—(1) The Minister may consult the Agency regarding proposals
for legislation relating to consumer protection and welfare.
(2) The Agency shall—
(a) keep under review the relevant statutory provisions,
(b) submit, from time to time, to the Minister or such other
Minister of the Government having responsibility for anyother statutory provisions relating to, or which impact on,consumer protection and welfare any proposals that itconsiders appropriate relating to any of the relevantstatutory provisions or any other statutory provisions orfor making or revoking any instruments under thoseprovisions,
(c) undertake such reviews of the relevant statutory pro-
visions as the Minister may direct, and
(d) assist in the preparation of such draft legislation as the
Minister may direct.
(3) Before submitting proposals to the Minister or any other Mini-
ster of the Government, as the case may be, the Agency shall consultany other person who, it appears to the Agency, is appropriate inthe circumstances to be consulted or whom the Minister or the otherMinister of the Government, as the case may be, directs is to beconsulted.
10.—(1) The Agency shall consist of the following members:
(a) a chairperson; and
(b) 12 ordinary members.
17Pt.2S . 8
Review of
legislation.
Membership of
Agency.Pt.2 S.10
18[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(2) The chief executive shall, for the duration of his or her
appointment, be an ex officio member of the Agency.
(3) The members of the Agency (other than the chief executive)
shall, as soon as practicable after the establishment day, be appointedby the Minister, and shall be persons who, in the opinion of theMinister, have experience of or shown capacity in matters relevantto the functions of the Agency.
(4) The Minister shall, in so far as is practicable and having regard
to the relevant experience of the persons concerned, ensure an equit-able balance between men and women in the composition of theAgency.
(5) A member of the Agency shall be paid by the Agency, out of
monies at its disposal, such remuneration (if any) and allowances forexpenses incurred by him or her as the Minister, with the consent ofthe Minister for Finance, may from time to time determine.
(6) Subject to subsection (5) , a member of the Agency shall hold
office on such terms and conditions as the Minister may determine.
(7) On the anniversary of the establishment day and on each sub-
sequent anniversary of the establishment day, 2 members of theAgency (other than the chairperson and the chief executive) shallretire from office.
(8) The members to retire under subsection (7) in any year shall
be those who have been longest in office since their last appointment,and where there are members whose appointment was made on thesame day and who are obliged to retire under subsection (7) , the
members to retire shall, unless those members otherwise agree, bedetermined by lot.
(9) A member of the Agency (other than the chief executive)
shall not serve for more than 10 consecutive years.
(10) A person shall be disqualified for holding and shall cease to
hold office as a member of the Agency if he or she—
(a) is adjudicated bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with his or her
creditors,
(c) is convicted of an indictable offence in relation to a
company,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty,
whether or not in connection with a company,
(e) has a declaration under section 150 of the Companies Act
1990 made against him or her or is subject or is deemedto be subject to a disqualification order by virtue of PartVII of that Act, or
(f) has a conflict of interest of such significance that, in the
opinion of the Minister requires that he or she should nothold or should cease to hold such office.
(11) A member of the Agency may at any time resign from office
by letter addressed to the Minister and the resignation shall take[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
effect on the date specified in the letter or the date the letter is
received by the Minister whichever is later.
(12) The Minister may at any time remove a member of the
Agency from office if, in the Minister’s opinion—
(a) the member has become incapable through ill-health of
effectively performing the duties of the office,
(b) the member has committed stated misbehaviour, or
(c) the removal appears to the Minister to be necessary for
the effective performance of the functions of the Agency.
(13) Subject to subsection (9) , a member of the Agency whose
period of membership expires by the passage of time shall be eligiblefor re-appointment as a member of the Agency.
(14) Subject to section 12(3) , the Agency may act notwithstanding
any vacancy or vacancies in its membership.
(15) If a member of the Agency dies, resigns, retires, becomes
disqualified or otherwise ceases to hold office or is removed fromoffice, the Minister may appoint a person to be a member of theAgency to fill the vacancy so occasioned and the person so appointedshall be appointed in the same manner as the member whooccasioned the vacancy.
(16) Where a vacancy occurs, the Minister shall take steps to fill
it as soon as practicable.
11.—(1) The Minister shall designate a member of the Agency
as chairperson.
(2) The term of office of the chairperson of the Agency shall be
5 years.
(3) Where the chairperson of the Agency ceases during his or her
term of office as chairperson to be a member of the Agency, he orshe shall also then cease to be chairperson of the Agency.
(4) The chairperson of the Agency may at any time resign his
or her office as chairperson by letter sent to the Minister, and theresignation shall, unless it is previously withdrawn in writing, takeeffect at the commencement of the meeting of the Agency held nextafter the Agency has been informed by the Minister of the res-ignation.
(5) The chairperson of the Agency shall, unless he or she sooner
dies or otherwise ceases to be chairperson by virtue of subsection (3)
or(4), hold office until the expiration of his or her period of member-
ship of the Agency and, if he or she is re-appointed as a member ofthe Agency, he or she shall be eligible for re-appointment as chair-person of the Agency.
12.—(1) The Agency shall hold such and as many meetings as
may be necessary for the performance of its functions.
(2) The Minister may, in consultation with the chairperson of the
Agency, fix the date, time and place of the first meeting of theAgency.
19Pt.2 S.10
Chairperson of
Agency.
Meetings and
procedures ofAgency.Pt.2 S.12
Committees.
20[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(3) The quorum for a meeting of the Agency shall be 5.
(4) At a meeting of the Agency—
(a) the chairperson of the Agency shall, if present, be the
chairperson of the meeting, and
(b) if and so long as the chairperson of the Agency is not
present or if the office of chairperson is vacant, themembers of the Agency who are present shall choose oneof their number to be the chairperson of the meeting.
(5) Each member of the Agency (including the chairperson of the
meeting concerned) present at a meeting shall have a vote.
(6) At a meeting of the Agency, a question on which a vote is
required shall be determined by a majority of votes of the membersof the Agency present and voting on the question and, in the case ofan equal division of votes, the chairperson of the meeting shall havea second or casting vote.
(7) Subject to this Act, the Agency shall regulate, by standing
orders or otherwise, the procedure and business of the Agency.
13.—(1) The Agency may establish committees—
(a) to assist and advise the Agency on matters relating to any
of its functions or on such matters as the Agency mayfrom time to time determine, or
(b) to perform such functions of the Agency as may be del-
egated by it from time to time.
(2) A committee shall consist of a chairperson and such number
of other members as the Agency may determine and may includepersons who are not members of the Agency or of its staff.
(3) The chairperson and other members of a committee shall be
appointed by the Agency.
(4) The Agency, when appointing a member of a committee,
shall—
(a) have regard to the range of qualifications and experience
necessary for the proper and effective discharge of thefunctions of the committee,
(b) have regard to the desirability of an equitable balance
between men and women in the composition of thecommittee,
(c) fix the member’s period of membership, and
(d) fix the terms of his or her membership.
(5) The members of a committee may be paid by the Agency such
fees as the Agency may determine, subject to the consent of theMinister and the Minister for Finance.
(6) A member of a committee may be removed at any time from
membership of the committee by the Agency.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(7) The Agency may at any time dissolve a committee.
(8) The Agency may regulate the procedure and business of a
committee but, subject to any such regulation, a committee mayregulate its own procedure and business.
(9) A committee may act notwithstanding a vacancy or vacancies
in its membership.
14.—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Agency
who shall be known, and is referred to in this Act, as the chiefexecutive.
(2) The chief executive shall, subject to subsection (3) ,b e
appointed by the Agency with the approval of the Minister and may,with the approval of the Minister, be removed from office for statedreasons by the Agency.
(3) Where a competition to appoint a chief executive is held prior
to the establishment day the successful candidate may be appointedby the Minister as the chief executive designate of the Agency.
(4) The chief executive—
(a) shall hold office under a written contract of service (which
contract may be renewed) for such period, not beingmore than 5 years, as is specified in the contract, subjectto such terms and conditions (including terms and con-ditions relating to remuneration, allowances for expensesand superannuation) as are so specified, being terms andconditions which are determined from time to time bythe Agency with the approval of the Minister given withthe consent of the Minister for Finance, and
(b) shall be paid out of monies at the disposal of the Agency.
(5) The chief executive shall not hold any other office or occupy
any other position in respect of which emoluments are payable, orcarry on any business, without the consent of the Agency and theapproval of the Minister.
(6) The chief executive is subject to the control of the members
of the Agency and, except as regards voting at meetings of theAgency, is required to comply with any lawful directions given bythose members with respect to the carrying out of the chief execu-tive’s functions.
(7) The person who, immediately before the establishment day,
holds the position of chief executive designate of the Agency shall,on the establishment day, become the chief executive and shall holdsuch office until such time as the Agency appoints a chief executiveunder subsection (2) .
(8) A person who was the chief executive shall not, for a period
of 12 months following his or her resignation, removal or retirementfrom office, hold any other office or employment or act as a consult-ant where he or she is likely to use or disclose information acquiredby him or her in the performance of his or her functions as chiefexecutive.
(9) Notwithstanding subsection (8) , a person who was the chief
executive shall not be precluded from—
21Pt.2 S.13
Chief executive.Pt.2 S.14
Functions of chief
executive.
Attendance of chief
executive beforeCommittee ofPublic Accounts.
22[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(a) holding any office or employment in the Civil Service or
any public body, or
(b) acting as a consultant to the Agency, the Minister or any
other Minister of the Government,
during the period referred to in that subsection.
15.—(1) The chief executive shall carry on, manage and control
generally the staff, administration and business of the Agency andshall perform such other functions as may be conferred on him orher by or under this Act or as may be determined by the Agency.
(2) The chief executive may do all such acts or things as are neces-
sary or expedient for the purposes of the exercise of his or her func-tions under this Act.
(3) The chief executive shall advise the Agency in relation to the
performance of the functions of the Agency and shall make anyproper proposals to the Agency on any matter relating to the activi-ties of the Agency.
(4) The chief executive shall be responsible to the Agency for the
performance of his or her functions and the implementation of theAgency’s policies.
(5) The chief executive shall provide the Agency with such infor-
mation, including financial information, in relation to the perform-ance of his or her functions as the Agency may require.
(6) Subject to subsection (7) , the chief executive may perform
such of his or her functions as he or she may deem proper throughor by any member of staff of the Agency duly authorised by the chiefexecutive in that behalf.
(7) ( a) The functions of the chief executive may be performed in
his or her absence or when the position of chief executiveis vacant by such member of the staff of the Agency asmay from time to time be designated for that purpose bythe Agency.
(b) A member of staff of the Agency designated under para-
graph (a) shall have all the powers, rights and duties con-
ferred on the chief executive by this Act and each refer-ence in this Act to the chief executive shall be deemed toinclude a reference to such member of staff.
16.—(1) The chief executive shall, whenever he or she is so
required by the committee of Da ´il E´ireann established under the
Standing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann to examine and report to Da ´il
E´ireann on the appropriation accounts and reports of the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor General, give evidence to that committee on—
(a) the regularity and propriety of the transactions recorded
or required to be recorded in any book or other record ofaccount subject to audit by the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral which the Agency is required by or under statuteto keep,
(b) the economy and efficiency of the Agency in the use of
its resources,[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(c) the systems, procedures and practices employed by the
Agency for the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness ofits operations, and
(d) any matter affecting the Agency referred to in a special
report of the Comptroller and Auditor General undersection 11(2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General(Amendment) Act 1993 or in any other report of theComptroller and Auditor General (in so far as it relatesto a matter specified in paragraph (a) ,(b)or(c)) that is
laid before Da ´il E´ireann.
(2) In the performance of his or her duties under subsection (1) ,
the chief executive shall not question or express an opinion on themerits of any policy of the Government or a Minister of the Govern-ment or on the merits of the objectives of such a policy.
17.—The chief executive shall, whenever required to do so by—
(a) a committee appointed by either House of the Oireachtas,
the business of which committee includes examination ofpolicy relating to consumer protection and welfare, or
(b) a committee appointed jointly by both Houses of the
Oireachtas, the business of which committee includesexamination of such policy,
attend before such committee to discuss the general activities of the
Agency.
18.—(1) Where a member of the Agency, the chief executive or
a member of the staff of the Agency is—
(a) nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann, or
(b) elected as a member of either House of the Oireachtas or
to be a member of the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to section 19 of the European Parlia-
ment Elections Act 1997 as having been elected to thatParliament, or
(d) elected or co-opted as a member of a local authority,
he or she shall thereupon—
(i) in the case of a member of the Agency or the chief execu-
tive, cease to be a member of the Agency or the chiefexecutive, as the case may be, and
(ii) in the case of a member of the staff of the Agency, stand
seconded from employment by the Agency and shall notbe paid by, or entitled to receive from, the Agency anyremuneration or allowances for expenses in respect of theperiod commencing on such nomination or election, orwhen he or she is so regarded as having been elected oron such election or co-option, as the case may be, andending when he or she ceases to be a member of suchHouse, a representative of such Parliament or a memberof a local authority.
23Pt.2 S.16
Attendance of chief
executive beforeother OireachtasCommittees.
Membership of
either House of theOireachtas,EuropeanParliament or localauthority.Pt.2 S.18
Indemnity for
members ofAgency.
Strategy statement
and workprogramme ofAgency.
24[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , that sub-
section shall be read as prohibiting the reckoning of a period thereinmentioned as service with the Agency for the purposes of any super-annuation benefits payable under section 36 or otherwise.
(3) A person who is for the time being—
(a) entitled under the Standing Orders of either House of the
Oireachtas to sit therein,
(b) a member of the European Parliament, or
(c) entitled under the standing orders of a local authority to
sit as a member thereof,
shall, while he or she is so entitled or is such a member, be disquali-
fied from becoming a member of the Agency, the chief executive ora member of the staff of the Agency.
(4) In this section “local authority” means a local authority for
the purposes of the Local Government Act 2001.
19.—(1) Where the Agency is satisfied that a person to whom this
section applies has discharged his or her duties in pursuance of thefunctions of the Agency in good faith, the Agency may, in the man-ner and to the extent and subject to the terms and conditions thatthe Agency may determine from time to time in consultation withthe Minister, indemnify that person against all actions or claimshowever they arise in respect of the discharge by him or her of hisor her duties.
(2) This section applies to—
(a) a member of the Agency,
(b) a member of a committee,
(c) a member of staff of the Agency, including the chief
executive,
(d) a person whose services are provided to the Agency under
section 26 , and
(e) an authorised officer.
20.—(1) As soon as practicable after the establishment day, and
thereafter at least 3 months before each third anniversary of theestablishment day, the Agency shall prepare and submit to the Mini-ster a strategy statement for the following 3 year period.
(2) A strategy statement shall—
(a) specify the key objectives, outputs and related strategies
(including the use of resources) of the Agency,
(b) have regard to the need to ensure the most beneficial,
effective and efficient use of the Agency’s resources,
(c) except for the first strategy statement, include a review of
the outcomes and effectiveness of the preceding strategystatement,[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(d) specify the manner in which the Agency proposes to assess
its performance in respect of the objectives referred toinparagraph (a) , taking account of relevant performance
indicators (financial and non-financial),
(e) be prepared in the form and manner that the Minister may
from time to time direct, and
(f) include any other matters that the Minister may from time
to time direct.
(3) When preparing the strategy statement, the Agency may con-
sult such persons as it considers appropriate.
(4) As soon as practicable after a strategy statement has been sub-
mitted to the Minister under subsection (1) , the Minister shall cause
a copy of the strategy statement to be laid before each House of theOireachtas and the strategy statement shall be published in the formand manner that the Agency considers appropriate.
(5) The Agency shall prepare and submit to the Minister, at least
2 months before the commencement of each financial year, a workprogramme relating to the discharge of its functions, including—
(a) having regard to the strategy statement, the objectives of
the Agency for that year and its strategy for achievingthose objectives,
(b) the priorities of the Agency for that year, having regard to
those objectives and its available resources, and
(c) any other matters that the Minister may from time to time
specify when issuing directions or guidelines under sub-
section (6) .
(6) The Minister may, from time to time, issue directions or guide-
lines to the Agency concerning the preparation of the work prog-ramme and the Agency shall comply with those directions and pre-pare the work programme in accordance with those guidelines.
21.—(1) As soon as practicable after the commencement of this
section, there shall be entered into between the Agency and everyone of the prescribed bodies one or more agreements for the pur-poses of—
(a) facilitating co-operation between the Agency and the pre-
scribed bodies in the performance of their respectivefunctions in so far as they relate to issues of consumerprotection and welfare,
(b) avoiding duplication of activities by the Agency and any
of the prescribed bodies,
(c) enabling the Agency to be consulted in relation to any
decisions by prescribed bodies which affect consumers,
(d) where appropriate, conducting joint studies or analysis of
matters relating to consumer protection or issues of con-cern to consumers,
and each such agreement that is entered into is referred to in this
section as a “co-operation agreement”.
25Pt.2 S.20
Provision for co-
operation betweenAgency and certainprescribed bodies.Pt.2 S.21
26[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(2) It shall not be necessary for the purposes of subsection (1) that
the same prescribed bodies be party to each agreement entered intowith the Agency in pursuance of that subsection.
(3) A co-operation agreement shall include provisions—
(a) enabling each party to furnish to another party infor-
mation in its possession if the information is required bythat other party for the purpose of the performance by itof any of its functions,
(b) enabling each party to forbear to perform any of its func-
tions in relation to a matter in circumstances where itis satisfied that another party is performing functions inrelation to that matter,
(c) requiring each party to consult with any other party before
performing any functions in circumstances where therespective exercise by each party of the functions con-cerned involves the determination of issues of consumerprotection and welfare that are identical to one anotheror are within the same category of such an issue, being acategory specified in the co-operation agreement, and
(d) ensuring that no person is the subject of—
(i) proceedings (whether civil or criminal) under this Act
or any other enactment, or
(ii) the exercise of any power under section 73 or75,
in respect of an alleged contravention of a provision of
this Act or any other enactment, by more than one ofthe parties.
(4) A co-operation agreement may be varied by the parties
concerned.
(5) The Minister and, where relevant, the Minister or Ministers of
the Government with responsibility for the prescribed body con-cerned shall each be furnished by the Agency with a copy of everyco-operation agreement (including any variation of the agreement)that has been made within 1 month after the agreement (or the vari-ation of it) has been made.
(6) A co-operation agreement, or any variation made to it, shall
be in writing and, as soon as practicable after the agreement or vari-ation has been made and furnished to the Minister or Ministers ofthe Government with responsibility for the prescribed body con-
cerned, notice of its making shall be published by the parties in suchmanner as they think fit.
(7) Such a notice shall state that a copy of the agreement con-
cerned (including the agreement as varied) may be inspected at suchplace, or by such means as is specified in the notice and that a copyof the agreement may be purchased from the parties in such manneras is so specified (and a copy of the agreement shall, accordingly, bemade available for such inspection and be made available for suchpurchase (at a cost not exceeding the reasonable cost of making acopy or, where appropriate, such cost and the amount of any post-age involved)).[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(8) Without prejudice to subsection (9) , nothing in any enactment
shall be read as preventing the provisions of a co-operation agree-ment from having effect in accordance with their terms.
(9) If information is furnished by one party to another party pur-
suant to a provision of a co-operation agreement of the kind referredto in subsection (3)(a) , the provisions of any enactment concerning
the disclosure of that information by the first-mentioned party shallapply to the second-mentioned party with respect to thatinformation.
(10) A failure by the Agency or a prescribed body to comply with
a provision of a co-operation agreement shall not invalidate the exer-cise by it of any power.
(11) ( a) In this section “prescribed body” means each of the
following:
(i) the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority;
(ii) a body prescribed by the Minister.
(b) Before prescribing a body for which another Minister of
the Government has responsibility, the Minister shallconsult with that other Minister of the Government.
(c) In prescribing a body for the purposes of this section the
Minister shall have regard to its functions and activities inso far as those functions and activities relate to consumerprotection and welfare.
(12) In this section “party” means a party to a co-operation agree-
ment and a reference to another party (whether that expression orthe expression “the other party” is used) shall, where there are 2 ormore other parties to the agreement, be construed as a reference toone or more of those other parties or each of them, as appropriate.
22.—(1) The Agency shall, as soon as practicable, but not later
than 6 months, after the end of each financial year make a report inwriting to the Minister (in this section referred to as the “annualreport”) of its activities during that year, and, before the annualreport is published, the Minister shall as soon as practicable afterreceipt by him or her of the annual report cause copies of the annualreport to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(2) An annual report shall include information in such form and
regarding such matters as the Minister may direct.
(3) The Agency may, from time to time, make such other reports
to the Minister relating to its functions as it considers appropriate oras the Minister may require.
(4) In addition to the information provided by the Agency in its
annual report and in reports made pursuant to subsection (3) , the
Agency shall provide the Minister with such information in relationto the performance of its functions, or with advice on any matterrelating to those functions, or both as the Minister may from time totime request.
23.—(1) The Agency shall submit estimates of income and expen-
diture to the Minister in such form, in respect of such periods and at
27Pt.2 S.21
Reports and
information toMinister.
Accounts and
audits.Pt.2 S.23
Advances by
Minister to Agency.
Disclosure of
interests.
28[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
such times as may be required by the Minister and shall furnish to
the Minister any information which the Minister may require inrelation to those estimates, including proposals and future plansrelating to the performance by the Agency of its functions over aspecified period of years.
(2) The Agency shall keep in such form as may be approved by
the Minister with the consent of the Minister for Finance all properand usual books or other records of account of—
(a) all monies received or expended by the Agency, and
(b) all property, assets and liabilities of the Agency,
including an income and expenditure account and a balance sheet
and, in particular, shall keep such special accounts (if any) as theMinister may from time to time direct.
(3) The chief executive and the other officers of the Agency shall,
whenever so requested by the Minister, permit any person appointedby the Minister to examine the books or other records of account ofthe Agency in respect of any financial year or other period and shallfacilitate any such examination, and the Agency shall pay such feeas may be fixed by the Minister.
(4) Accounts kept in pursuance of this section, signed by the chief
executive, shall be submitted by the Agency to the Comptroller andAuditor General for audit as soon as practicable, but not later than3 months, after the end of the financial year to which the accountsrelate.
(5) When so audited, a copy of the accounts together with a copy
of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General thereon shallbe presented by the Agency to the Minister who shall, as soon aspracticable but not later than 3 months thereafter, cause copies ofthem to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
24.—The Minister may from time to time advance to the Agency
out of monies provided by the Oireachtas such amount or amountsas the Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for Finance,determine for the purposes of expenditure by the Agency in the per-formance of its functions under any of the relevant statutoryprovisions.
25.—(1) Where the chief executive, a member of the Agency or
of a committee, a member of the staff of the Agency, an authorisedofficer or a consultant, adviser or other person engaged by theAgency has a pecuniary interest or other beneficial interest in, ormaterial to, any matter which is to be considered by the Agency, heor she shall—
(a) disclose to the Agency the nature of the interest in
advance of any consideration of the matter,
(b) neither influence nor seek to influence a decision relating
to the matter,
(c) take no part in any consideration of the matter,
(d) if he or she is the chief executive or a member of the
Agency or of a committee or a member of the staff of[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
the Agency, withdraw from the meeting for so long as
the matter is being discussed or considered and neithervote nor otherwise act as such chief executive or memberin relation to the matter.
(2) For the purposes of this section, but without prejudice to the
generality of subsection (1) , a person shall be regarded as having a
beneficial interest if in each of the following cases:
(a) the person, any connected relative of the person or a nomi-
nee of either of them is a member of a company or anyother body which has a beneficial interest in, or materialto, any matter referred to in that subsection;
(b) the person or any connected relative of the person is in
partnership with or is in the employment of a person whohas a beneficial interest in, or material to, any suchmatter;
(c) the person or any connected relative of the person is a
party to any arrangement or agreement (whether or notenforceable) concerning land to which any such matterrelates;
(d) any connected relative has a beneficial interest in, or
material to, any such matter.
(3) For the purposes of this section a person shall not be regarded
as having a beneficial interest in, or material to, any matter by reasononly that he or she or any company or other person or any otherbody mentioned in subsection (2) has an interest which is so remote
or insignificant that it cannot reasonably be regarded as likely toinfluence a person in considering or discussing, or in voting on, anyquestion in respect of the matter or in performing any function inrelation to that matter.
(4) The Agency shall determine any question as to whether a
course of conduct, if pursued by a person, would be a failure by himor her to comply with subsection (1) , and particulars of the determi-
nation shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which thedetermination is made.
(5) If a disclosure is made under subsection (1) at a meeting of
the Agency, particulars of the disclosure shall be recorded in theminutes of the meeting concerned, and for so long as the matter towhich the disclosure relates is being dealt with by the meeting, theperson by whom the disclosure is made shall not be counted in thequorum for the meeting.
(6) Where the Minister is satisfied that a member of the Agency
has contravened subsection (1) , the Minister may, if he or she thinks
fit, remove that member from office and, where a person is removedfrom office pursuant to this subsection, the person shall thenceforthbe disqualified from being a member of the Agency.
(7) Where a person other than a person to whom subsection (6)
applies contravenes subsection (1) , the Agency, in consultation with
the Minister, shall decide the appropriate action to be taken inrelation to the person, including the termination of a contract ofservice or a contract for services with the person.
29Pt.2 S.25Pt.2 S.25
Power to enter into
contracts and toengage consultantsand advisers.
Premises of
Agency.
Seal of Agency.
Power to borrow.
Authorised officers
of Agency.
30[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(8) In this section “connected relative”, in relation to a person,
means a spouse, partner, parent, brother, sister, child or the spouseof a child of the person.
26.—The Agency may from time to time as it considers necessary
for the performance of its functions for such period and subject tosuch terms and conditions as the Agency considers appropriate—
(a) enter into contracts with persons, and
(b) engage consultants or advisers,
and any sums thereby payable by the Agency to such persons, con-
sultants or advisers shall be paid by the Agency out of monies atits disposal.
27.—The Agency may, for the purposes of providing premises
necessary for the performance of its functions, lease, equip and main-tain offices and premises subject to the consent of the Minister andthe Minister for Finance.
28.—(1) The Agency shall, as soon as may be after the establish-
ment day, provide itself with a seal.
(2) The seal of the Agency shall be authenticated by the signa-
ture of—
(a) the chairperson of the Agency or another member of the
Agency authorised in that behalf by it, or
(b) the chief executive or any other member of the staff of the
Agency authorised in that behalf by it.
(3) Judicial notice shall be taken of the seal of the Agency and an
instrument purporting to be an instrument made by the Agency andto be sealed with its seal (purporting to be authenticated in accord-ance with subsection (2) ) shall be received in evidence and shall be
deemed to be such instrument without further proof unless the con-trary is shown.
(4) Any contract or instrument which, if entered into or executed
by a person not being a body corporate, would not require to beunder seal may be entered into or executed on behalf of the Agencyby any person generally or specially authorised in that behalf bythe Agency.
29.—The Agency may borrow money (including money in a cur-
rency other than the currency of the State) for the purpose of per-forming any of the functions of the Agency, subject to the consentof the Minister and the Minister for Finance and any conditions theymay determine.
30.—(1) The Agency may appoint in writing such and so many
persons, including members of the staff of the Agency, to be author-ised officers for the purposes of all or any of the relevant statutoryprovisions and such appointment may be specified to be for a fixedperiod.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(2) An authorised officer under section 16 of the Consumer Infor-
mation Act 1978 holding office immediately before the commence-ment of section 37 shall continue in office as if appointed under sub-
section (1) .
(3) Every authorised officer appointed under this section shall be
furnished with a warrant of appointment and shall, when exercisingany power conferred on him or her by this section, if requested by aperson affected, produce the warrant of appointment or copy of it tothat person.
(4) An appointment under this section as an authorised officer
shall cease—
(a) if the Agency revokes the appointment,
(b) if the appointment is for a fixed period, on the expiry of
that period, or
(c) if the person appointed ceases to be a member of staff of
the Agency.
(5) An authorised officer may, for the purpose of obtaining any
information which may be required in relation to a matter underinvestigation under any of the relevant statutory provisions—
(a) at all reasonable times enter any premises on, at or in
which there are reasonable grounds to believe that anytrade or business or any activity in connection with atrade or business is being, or has been, carried on, or thatrecords in relation to that trade, business or activity arekept, and search and inspect the premises and anyrecords that are on, at or in that premises,
(b) secure for later inspection any, or any part of any, prem-
ises on, at or in which such records are kept or thereare reasonable grounds for believing that such recordsare kept,
(c) require any person who carries on such trade, business or
activity or any person employed in respect of such trade,business or activity to produce to the authorised officer
such records and where such records are kept in a non-legible form to reproduce them in a legible form or togive to him or her any information as the authorisedofficer may reasonably require in relation to suchrecords,
(d) inspect and take copies of or extracts from any such
records on, at or in the premises, including in the case ofinformation in a non-legible form, copies of or extractsfrom such information in a permanent legible form,
(e) remove and retain such records for such periods as may
be reasonable for further examination, subject to a war-rant being issued for that purpose by a judge of the Dis-trict Court,
(f) require any such person to give to the authorised officer
any information which the authorised officer may reason-ably require in regard to such trade, business or activity
31Pt.2 S.30Pt.2 S.30
32[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
or in respect of the persons carrying on such trade, busi-
ness or activity or employed in connection with suchtrade, business or activity,
(g) require any such person to give to the authorised officer
any other information which the authorised officer mayreasonably require in respect of such trade, business oractivity,
(h) require any person by or on whose behalf data equipment
is or has been used or any person having charge of, orotherwise concerned with the operation of, the dataequipment or any associated apparatus or material, toafford the authorised officer all reasonable assistance inrelation to it and assist in the retrieval of informationconnected with the operation of such data equipment,apparatus or material,
(i) summon, at any reasonable time, any other person
employed in connection with such trade, business oractivity to give to the authorised officer any informationwhich the authorised officer may reasonably require inrelation to such trade, business or activity and to produceto the authorised officer any records which are in the con-trol of that other person.
(6) An authorised officer may, for the purpose of obtaining any
information which may be required in relation to a matter underinvestigation under the relevant statutory provisions, at all reason-able times enter any premises, at which there are reasonable groundsto believe that any trade or business or any activity in connectionwith a trade or business is, or has been, carried on and inspect anygoods on the premises and may—
(a) on paying or making tender of payment therefor, take any
of the goods, or
(b) confirm by such other method as appropriate the price at
which the goods are on offer or any other informationrelating to the goods for the purpose of an investigation.
(7) An authorised officer shall not, other than with the consent of
the occupier, enter a private dwelling unless he or she has obtaineda warrant from the District Court under subsection (10) authorising
such entry.
(8) Where an authorised officer in the exercise of his or her
powers under this section is prevented from entering any premisesan application may be made under subsection (10) authorising such
entry.
(9) An authorised officer appointed under this section, when
exercising any powers conferred on an authorised officer by this Act,may be accompanied by such other authorised officers or membersof the Garda Sı ´ocha´na or both as he or she considers necessary.
(10) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on an authorised
officer by or under any provision of this section, if a judge of theDistrict Court is satisfied on the sworn information of an authorisedofficer that there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that there isinformation required by an authorised officer under this section heldon or at any, or any part of any, premises, the judge may issue awarrant authorising an authorised officer (accompanied by such[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
other authorised officers or members of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na or both
as provided for in subsection (9) ) at any time or times within one
month from the date of issue of the warrant, on production if sorequested of the warrant, to enter the premises, using reasonableforce where necessary, and exercise all or any of the powers con-ferred on an authorised officer under this section.
(11) A person who falsely represents himself or herself as an auth-
orised officer commits an offence and is liable on summary convic-tion to the fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(12) A person who—
(a) obstructs or impedes an authorised officer in the exercise
of a power under this section,
(b) without reasonable excuse, does not comply with a request
or requirement of an authorised officer under thissection, or
(c) in purported compliance with such a requirement gives
information that is false or misleading in a materialrespect,
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to the fines
and penalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(13) Where the Agency or an authorised officer proposes to
retain, pursuant to this section, books, documents or records for aperiod longer than 14 days after the date on which they were seizedor obtained by the authorised officer, the Agency or that officershall, before the expiry of that period of 14 days, or such longerperiod with the consent of the person hereafter mentioned, furnish,on request, a copy of the books, documents or records to the personwho it appears to the Agency or officer is, but for the exercise of thepowers under this section, entitled to possession of them.
(14) Where an advertisement in relation to the supply or pro-
vision of any product is published and does not include the nameand address of the person who procured such publication or his orher agent, the publisher of the advertisement shall, if the Agency oran authorised officer so requests within 12 months of the publicationof the advertisement, give to the Agency or the authorised officer,the name and address of such person or his or her agent.
(15) A person who fails to comply with a request under subsection
(14) or, in purported compliance with such a request, gives infor-
mation that is false or misleading in a material respect, commits anoffence and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penaltiesprovided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(16) In this section—
“premises” means any place or vehicle;“records” includes, in addition to a record in writing—
(a) discs, tapes, sound-tracks or other devices, including elec-
tronic devices, in which information, sounds or signals areembodied so as to be capable (with or without the aid ofsome other instrument) of being reproduced in legible oraudible form,
33Pt.2 S.30Pt.2 S.30
Disclosure of
information relatingto offences.
34[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(b) films, tapes or other devices, including electronic devices,
in which visual images are embodied so as to be capable(with or without the aid of some other instrument) ofbeing reproduced in visual form,
(c) photographs,
and a reference to copies of records includes—
(i) in the case of records falling within paragraph (a) only,
transcripts of the sounds or signals embodied in them,
(ii) in the case of records falling within paragraph (b) only,
still reproductions of the images embodied in them, and
(iii) in the case of records falling within both paragraphs (a)
and (b), such transcripts together with such still repro-
ductions;
“vehicle” means any conveyance in or by which any person or thing,
or both, is transported which is designed for use on land, or in wateror in the air, or in more than one of those ways, and includes—
(a) part of a vehicle,
(b) an article designed as a vehicle but not capable of func-
tioning as a vehicle,
(c) a skip or other container designed for use or used for car-
riage on a vehicle,
(d) a trailer designed for use or used with a vehicle.
31.—(1) Notwithstanding any other law, information which, in the
opinion of—
(a) the Competition Authority,
(b) a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
(c) the Director of Corporate Enforcement,
(d) an officer of the Revenue Commissioners,
(e) the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of
Ireland, or
(f) such other person as may be prescribed after consultation
by the Minister with any other Minister of the Govern-ment appearing to the Minister to be concerned,
may relate to the commission of an offence under any of the relevant
statutory provisions may be disclosed by the body or other personreferred to in any of paragraphs (a) to(f)to the Agency, a member
of the Agency or a member of staff of the Agency or an authorisedofficer.
(2) Notwithstanding section 32 , information, which in the opinion
of the chief executive may relate to the commission of an offencewhich is not an offence under the relevant statutory provisions, maybe disclosed to—[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(a) the Competition Authority,
(b) a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
(c) the Director of Corporate Enforcement,
(d) an officer of the Revenue Commissioners,
(e) the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of
Ireland, or
(f) such other person as may be prescribed after consultation
by the Minister with any other Minister of the Govern-ment appearing to the Minister to be concerned.
32.—(1) A person shall not, unless authorised by the Agency or
by a member of the staff of the Agency duly authorised in that behalfso to do, or required by law, disclose confidential informationobtained by him or her in his or her capacity, or while performingduties as—
(a) a member of the Agency or of a committee,
(b) the chief executive,
(c) a member of the staff of the Agency,
(d) a consultant or adviser engaged by the Agency or an
employee of such a consultant or adviser,
(e) an authorised officer, or
(f) a person engaged by the Agency in any other capacity.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to—
(a) a communication made by a member of the Agency or of
a committee, the chief executive, a member of staff of theAgency or an authorised officer, in the performance ofany of his or her functions under this Act, being a com-munication the making of which was necessary for theperformance by the member, chief executive, member ofstaff of the Agency or authorised officer of any such func-tion, or
(b) the disclosure by a member of the Agency or of a commit-
tee, the chief executive, a member of staff of the Agencyor an authorised officer to any member of the GardaSı´ocha´na of information which, in the opinion of the
member or chief executive or member of staff of theAgency or authorised officer, may relate to the com-mission of an offence (whether an offence under this Actor not).
(3) A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence
and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penalties pro-vided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(4) Nothing in subsection (1) shall prevent the disclosure of infor-
mation by means of a report made—
(a) to the Agency or a committee, as the case may be, or
35Pt.2 S.31
Prohibition on
unauthoriseddisclosure ofinformation.Pt.2 S.32
Amendment of
Freedom ofInformation Act1997.
Staffing.
36[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(b) by or on behalf of the Agency or a committee to the
Minister.
(5) A person who suffers loss or harm as a result of a contra-
vention of subsection (1) shall be entitled to bring proceedings
against the person referred to in subsection (6) in any court of com-
petent jurisdiction seeking one, or more than one as appropriate, ofthe following reliefs in respect of that loss or harm:
(a) relief by way of injunction or declaration;
(b) damages.
(6) The person mentioned in subsection (5) is—
(a) if the person who contravened subsection (1) is other than
a member of the Agency or a member of staff of theAgency or an authorised officer, that person,
(b) if the person who contravened subsection (1) is a member
of the Agency or a member of staff of the Agency or anauthorised officer and the relief sought, or to the extentthat the relief sought, in the proceedings is—
(i) relief referred to in subsection (5)(a) , that person,
(ii) relief referred to in subsection (5)(b) , the Agency.
(7) An action under subsection (5) shall be regarded as an action
founded on tort.
(8) In this section “confidential information” includes information
that is expressed by the Agency or a committee, as the case may be,to be confidential either as regards particular information or asregards information of a particular class or description.
33.—On the establishment day, the Freedom of Information Act
1997 is amended by inserting—
(a) in paragraph 1(2) of the First Schedule, “the National
Consumer Agency,”, and
(b) in Part I of the Third Schedule at the end thereof—
(i) in column (2), “ Consumer Protection Act 2007 ”, and
(ii) in column (3), “ Section 32 ” opposite the mention in
column (2) of the Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Chapter 2
Staff of Agency
34.—(1) Subject to section 35 , the Agency may, with the approval
of the Minister given with the consent of the Minister for Finance—
(a) appoint such and so many persons to be members of the
staff of the Agency as it may from time to time deter-mine, and[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(b) determine the grades of such staff of the Agency and the
number of staff in each grade.
(2) Subject to section 35 , the terms and conditions of service,
including terms and conditions relating to remuneration and allow-ances for expenses (which shall be paid by the Agency out of moniesat its disposal), of the members of the staff of the Agency shall besuch as the Agency may from time to time, with the approval of theMinister given with the consent of the Minister for Finance,determine.
35.—(1) On the request of the chief executive made within 24
months after the establishment day, the Minister may, by directionin writing, transfer to the Agency the employment of a person whois employed in a Department of State or by a public body, but onlyif the person has agreed to have that employment transferred tothe Agency.
(2) The chief executive may make such a request only with the
concurrence of the Agency.
(3) The conditions of employment of a person whose employment
is transferred under this section are to be no less favourable thanthose applicable to the person immediately before the transfer,except in so far as a collective agreement negotiated with a recog-nised trade union or staff association of which the person is amember expressly provides otherwise.
(4) If any dispute arises between a person whose employment is
transferred under this section and the Agency as to the conditions ofemployment applicable to the person immediately before thetransfer, the Minister shall determine the dispute.
(5) If a person’s employment is transferred under this section, the
person’s previous service with a Department of State or public bodyis to be counted as service for the purposes of the following Acts ofthe Oireachtas:
(a) the Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003;
(b) the Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001;
(c) the Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act
2003;
(d) the Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005;
(e) the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005;
(f) the Terms of Employment (Information) Acts 1994 and
2001;
(g) the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997;
(h) the Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006;
(i) the Carer’s Leave Act 2001.
(6) In this section “recognised trade union or staff association”
means a trade union or staff association recognised by the Agencyfor the purposes of negotiations which are concerned with the
37Pt.2 S.34
Transfer of
employment ofcertain persons toAgency.Pt.2 S.35
Superannuation.
38[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
remuneration or conditions of employment or the working con-
ditions of employees.
36.—(1) The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister given
with the consent of the Minister for Finance, make such provision asit considers appropriate in relation to the superannuation of personsappointed under section 34 or transferred to the Agency under
section 35 .
(2) The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister given with
the consent of the Minister for Finance, make a scheme or schemesfor the granting of superannuation benefits to or in respect of themembers of staff of the Agency as the Agency thinks fit, and shallcarry out such a scheme in accordance with its terms.
(3) A superannuation scheme shall fix the time and conditions of
retirement for all persons to or in respect of whom superannuationbenefits are payable under the scheme, and different times and con-ditions may be fixed in respect of different classes of persons.
(4) The Agency may, with the approval of the Minister given with
the consent of the Minister for Finance, make a scheme amendingor revoking a superannuation scheme, and shall carry out such ascheme in accordance with its terms.
(5) Superannuation benefits granted under this section to persons
transferred to the Agency under section 35 , and the terms and con-
ditions relating to those benefits, shall not be less favourable to thosepersons than those to which they were entitled immediately beforethey were transferred under the said section 35 .
(6) Superannuation benefits shall not be granted by the Agency
to or in respect of any member of the staff of the Agency, nor shallany other arrangement be entered into by the Agency for the pro-vision of such benefits to such person, except in accordance with asuperannuation scheme or, if the Agency, with the approval of theMinister given with the consent of the Minister for Finance, sanctionsthe granting of such benefits, in accordance with that sanction.
(7) A superannuation scheme shall provide for an appeal from a
decision relating to superannuation benefits payable under thescheme.
(8) Where at any time during the period between his or her
transfer under section 35 and the coming into operation of a scheme
under this section, a superannuation benefit falls due for payment toor in respect of a person who was transferred under section 35 , the
benefit shall be calculated and paid by the Agency in accordancewith the scheme or such provisions in relation to superannuation asapplied to the person immediately before his or her transfer underthe said section 35 , and for that purpose that person’s pensionable
service with the Agency and previous pensionable service shall beaggregated.
(9) The Minister shall cause a superannuation scheme to be laid
before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it ismade and, if a resolution annulling the scheme is passed by eithersuch House within the next 21 days on which that House has sat afterthe scheme is laid before it, the scheme shall be annulled accordinglybut without prejudice to the validity of anything previously doneunder the scheme.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(10) In this section—
“superannuation benefits” means pensions, gratuities and other
allowances payable to or in respect of a person on ceasing to be amember of the staff of the Agency;
“superannuation scheme” means a superannuation scheme made
under subsection (2) or(4).
Chapter 3
Transfer of Functions, etc.
37.—(1) The administration and business in connection with the
exercise, performance or execution of any of the functions trans-ferred by subsection (2) are transferred to the Agency on the estab-
lishment day.
(2) The functions vested in the Director by or under the existing
enactments are transferred to the Agency on the establishment day.
(3) References to the Director and the office of the Director con-
tained in any Act (within the meaning of the Interpretation Act2005) or instrument (including a licence or certificate granted, nomi-nation made or consent or authorisation given thereunder) relatingto any functions transferred by subsection (2) shall, on and after the
establishment day, be read as references to the Agency.
(4) Anything commenced before the establishment day by or
under the authority of the Director may, in so far as it relates tofunctions transferred by subsection (2) to the Agency, be carried on
or completed on or after that day by the Agency.
(5) Where immediately before the establishment day, any legal
proceedings are pending to which the Director is a party or the pros-ecutor and the proceedings have reference to any functions trans-ferred to the Agency by subsection (2) , the name of the Agency shall,
in so far as the proceedings relate to functions transferred by subsec-
tion (2) , be substituted in those proceedings for that of the Director
or added in those proceedings and those proceedings shall not abateby reason of such substitution.
38.—(1) Every bond, guarantee or other security of a continuing
nature made or given by the Director to any person or by any personto the Director that is in force immediately before the establishmentday, and every contract or agreement in writing made between theDirector and any person that is in force but is not fully executed andcompleted immediately before the establishment day shall continuein force on and after that day and shall be construed and have effectas if the name of the Agency was substituted therein for the Director.
(2) Every document (including any certificate, licence, nomi-
nation, consent or authorisation) granted or made by the Director inthe exercise of a function transferred by section 37 that is in force
immediately before the establishment day shall continue in force onand after that day as if it had been granted or made by the Agencyand shall be construed and have effect accordingly.
39.—(1) With effect from the establishment day the following are
transferred to the Agency:
39Pt.2 S.36
Transfer of
functions toAgency.
Preservation of
existing contracts.
Transfer of assets
and liabilities.Pt.2 S.39
References in
certain otherenactments toDirector or Officeof Director.
General prohibition
on unfaircommercialpractices.
40[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(a) all rights and property and rights relating to such property
held or enjoyed immediately before that day by theDirector; and
(b) all liabilities incurred before that day by the Director
which had not been discharged before that day;
and, accordingly, without any further conveyance, transfer or
assignment—
(i) the said property, real and personal, shall, on that day, vest
in the Agency for all the estate, term or interest forwhich, immediately before that day, it was vested in theDirector, but subject to all trusts and equities affectingthe property and capable of being performed,
(ii) those rights shall, on and from that day, be enjoyed by the
Agency, and
(iii) those liabilities shall, on and from that day, be liabilities
of the Agency.
(2) All monies, stocks, shares and securities transferred to the
Agency by this section which, immediately before the establishmentday, are in the name of the Director, shall, upon the request of theAgency, be transferred into its name.
(3) Every right and liability transferred to the Agency by this
section may, on or after the establishment day, be sued on, recoveredor enforced by or against the Agency in its own name and it shallnot be necessary for the Agency to give notice of the transfer to theperson whose right or liability is transferred by this section.
(4) The Agency shall not, without the consent of the Minister,
dispose of any part of any land or any interest therein transferred toor vested in the Agency under this section.
40.—(1) The Acts of the Oireachtas specified in Part 1 ofSchedule
3are amended as indicated in that Schedule.
(2) The instruments specified in Part 2 ofSchedule 3 are amended
as indicated in that Schedule.
PART 3
Commercial Practices
Chapter 1
Unfair Commercial Practices
41.—(1) A trader shall not engage in an unfair commercial
practice.
(2) A commercial practice is unfair if it—
(a) is contrary to one or both of the following (the require-
ments of professional diligence):[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(i) the general principle of good faith in the trader’s field
of activity;
(ii) the standard of skill and care that the trader may
reasonably be expected to exercise in respect ofconsumers,
and
(b) would be likely to—
(i) cause appreciable impairment of the average con-
sumer’s ability to make an informed choice inrelation to the product concerned, and
(ii) cause the average consumer to make a transactional
decision that the average consumer would not other-wise make.
(3) In determining whether a commercial practice is unfair under
subsection (2) , the commercial practice shall be considered in its fac-
tual context, taking account of all of its features and the cir-cumstances.
Chapter 2
Misleading Commercial Practices
42.—(1) A trader shall not engage in a misleading commercial
practice.
(2) Without prejudice to the amendments of the Hallmarking Act
1981 made by section 99 ,sections 43 to46specify the various circum-
stances in which a commercial practice is misleading.
43.—(1) A commercial practice is misleading if it includes the pro-
vision of false information in relation to any matter set out in subsec-
tion (3) and that information would be likely to cause the average
consumer to make a transactional decision that the average con-sumer would not otherwise make.
(2) A commercial practice is misleading if it would be likely to
cause the average consumer to be deceived or misled in relation toany matter set out in subsection (3) and to make a transactional
decision that the average consumer would not otherwise make.
(3) The following matters are set out for the purposes of subsec-
tions (1) and (2):
(a) the existence or nature of a product;
(b) the main characteristics of a product, including, without
limitation, any of the following:
(i) its geographical origin or commercial origin;
(ii) its availability, including, without limitation, its avail-
ability at a particular time or place or at a part-icular price;
(iii) its quantity, weight or volume;
41Pt.3 S.41
General prohibition
on misleadingcommercialpractices.
Misleading: false,
misleading ordeceptiveinformation.Pt.3 S.43
42[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(iv) its benefits or fitness for purpose;
(v) the results to be expected from it;
(vi) the risks it presents to consumers;
(vii) its usage or prior history;
(viii) its composition, ingredients, components or
accessories;
(ix) the specifications of the product, including, without
limitation, the grade, standard, style, status or modelof the product;
(x) the after-supply customer assistance available to con-
sumers in relation to the product;
(xi) the handling of consumer complaints in relation to
the product;
(xii) the method or date of—
(I) the product’s delivery, supply or provision, or
(II) in the case of goods, the product’s manufacture;
(xiii) the results and material features of tests or checks
carried out on the product;
(xiv) in relation to a service, its execution or performance;
(c) the price of the product, the manner in which that price is
calculated or the existence or nature of a specific priceadvantage;
(d) the need for any part, replacement, servicing or repair in
relation to the product;
(e) the existence, extent or nature of any approval or sponsor-
ship (direct or indirect) of the product by others;
(f) the nature, attributes or rights of the trader, including,
without limitation, the following:
(i) the trader’s identity, qualifications, assets or status;
(ii) the trader’s affiliation or connection with others;
(iii) the existence, extent or nature of—
(I) any industrial, commercial or intellectual prop-
erty rights the trader may have, or
(II) any award, distinction, approval or sponsorship
(direct or indirect) the trader has or hasreceived;
(g) the extent of the trader’s commitments;
(h) the trader’s motives for the commercial practice;
(i) the nature of the trader’s supply process;[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(j) the legal rights of a consumer (whether contractual or
otherwise) or matters respecting when, how or in whatcircumstances those rights may be exercised.
(4) If the commercial practice in subsection (2) involves the pro-
vision of information, it is not a defence in any proceeding to showthat the information is factually correct.
(5) In determining whether a commercial practice under subsec-
tion (1) or(2)is misleading, the commercial practice shall be con-
sidered in its factual context, taking account of all of its features andthe circumstances.
(6) Without limiting subsection (5) —
(a) if the commercial practice involves a representation or
creates an impression (whether in advertising, marketingor otherwise) that a product was previously offered at adifferent price or at a particular price, consideration shallbe given to whether the product was previously offeredopenly and in good faith at that price and at the sameplace for a reasonable period of time before the represen-tation was made, and
(b) if the commercial practice involves a representation or
creates an impression (whether in advertising, marketingor otherwise) that a product is being offered by a traderat or below a price recommended by the manufacturer,producer or supplier of the product (other than thetrader), consideration shall be given to whether thatrecommended price was one recommended in good faithby that manufacturer, producer or supplier.
(7) In determining the geographical origin of goods the manufac-
ture or production of which involves more than one country, con-sideration shall be given to where the goods underwent their lastsubstantial and economically justified processing or working (in aplace equipped for that purpose), resulting in the manufacture ofnew goods or representing an important stage of the manufactureor production.
44.—(1) A commercial practice involving marketing or advertis-
ing is misleading if it would be likely to cause the averageconsumer—
(a) to confuse—
(i) a competitor’s product with the trader’s product, or
(ii) a competitor’s trade name, trade mark or some other
distinguishing feature or mark with that of thetrader,
and
(b) to make a transactional decision that the average con-
sumer would not otherwise make.
(2) In determining whether a commercial practice is misleading
under subsection (1) , the commercial practice shall be considered in
its factual context, taking account of all of its features and the cir-cumstances.
43Pt.3 S.43
Misleading:
competitor orproduct confusionin marketing oradvertising.Pt.3
Misleading: non-
compliance withcommitment undercode of practice bywhich trader isbound.
Misleading:
withholding,omitting orconcealing materialinformation.
44[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
45.—(1) A commercial practice is misleading if—
(a) it involves a representation that the trader abides, or is
bound, by a code of practice,
(b) the representation referred to in paragraph (a) would be
likely to cause the average consumer to make a trans-actional decision that the average consumer would nototherwise make, and
(c) the trader fails to comply with a firm commitment in that
code of practice.
(2) In determining whether a commercial practice is misleading
under subsection (1) , the commercial practice shall be considered in
its factual context, taking account of all of its features and the cir-cumstances.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a firm commitment in a code
of practice is one that is not merely aspirational but is capable ofbeing verified.
46.—(1) A commercial practice is misleading if the trader omits
or conceals material information that the average consumer wouldneed, in the context, to make an informed transactional decision(“material information”) and such practice would be likely to causethe average consumer to make a transactional decision that the aver-age consumer would not otherwise make.
(2) A commercial practice is misleading if—
(a) the trader—
(i) provides material information referred to in subsec-
tion (1) in a manner that is unclear, unintelligible,
ambiguous or untimely, or
(ii) fails to identify the commercial intent of the practice
(if such intent is not already apparent from thecontext),
and
(b) such practice would be likely to cause the average con-
sumer to make a transactional decision that the averageconsumer would not otherwise make.
(3) If a commercial practice is or includes an invitation to pur-
chase, each of the following constitutes material information for thepurposes of this section, unless already apparent to the consumer inthe context of the commercial practice:
(a) the main characteristics of the product, to an extent appro-
priate to the medium and the product;
(b) the geographical address of the trader, the identity of the
trader (such as his or her trading name) and, if the traderis acting in a consumer transaction as an agent of anothertrader, the geographical address and the identity of thatother trader;[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(c) the price of the product (inclusive of taxes) or, if the nat-
ure of the product is such that the price cannot reason-ably be calculated in advance, the manner in which theprice is calculated;
(d) any freight, delivery or postal charges that apply in
relation to the product or, if such charges cannot reason-ably be calculated in advance, a statement of the fact thatsuch charges will apply and be payable by the consumer;
(e) the handling of consumer complaints in relation to the
product or the arrangement for payment, delivery or per-formance, if such handling or arrangement does not meetor accord with—
(i) the standard of skill and care that the trader may
reasonably be expected to exercise in respect of con-sumers, or
(ii) the general principle of good faith in the trader’s field
of activity;
(f) if applicable, the legal rights of a consumer (whether con-
tractual or otherwise) to withdraw from or cancel theconsumer transaction.
(4) The material information set out in subsection (3) is in
addition to and not instead of any other information that the traderis required by law to provide to a consumer, including, without limi-tation, any information required to be provided by regulations underthis Act.
(5) In determining whether a commercial practice is misleading
under this section, the commercial practice shall be considered in itsfactual context, taking account of all of its features and the circum-stances, including—
(a) the space or time available in any communications
medium used, and
(b) any measures taken by the trader to make the material
information available to consumers by other means.
47.—A trader who engages in any misleading commercial practice
described in section 43(1) or(2)commits an offence and is liable on
conviction on indictment or on summary conviction, as the case maybe, to the fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
48.—(1) In this section—
“cash” means cash that is legal tender;“relevant method”, in relation to payment, means each of the follow-
ing methods of payment—
(a) cash,
(b) credit card,
(c) direct debit,
45Pt.3 S.46
Offence: misleading
commercialpractices.
Prohibition on
surcharges whereone method ofpayment chosen inpreference toanother.Pt.3 S.48
46[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(d) any other method or methods of payment prescribed by
the Minister.
(2) In this section a reference to a representation includes a refer-
ence to a representation made at any stage up to the time the traderaccepts payment in respect of the product concerned.
(3) Where—
(a) a trader makes a representation that the trader will accept
payment in respect of a product by any one of 2 or moredifferent relevant methods, or
(b) it is the practice of a trader to accept payment in respect
of a product by different relevant methods,
the trader shall not impose an additional charge on any person by
reason of the person’s making payment in respect of the product byone of the relevant methods (to which the foregoing representationrelates or as regards which the foregoing practice exists) as distinctfrom another of them.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) —
(a) without limiting any of the other means by which that sub-
section may be contravened, a trader shall be deemedto impose an additional charge, by reason of the personconcerned making payment as mentioned in that subsec-tion, if the price charged by the trader in respect of theproduct concerned is, where one of the relevant methodsof payment is used by that person, greater than the pricethat would be so charged were that person to use anotherof them,
(b) if the representation or practice referred to in that subsec-
tion relates not only to relevant methods of payment butto one or more other methods of payment as well, thatfact is immaterial, and
(c) it is immaterial that the trader can show that any expenses
incurred by the trader in accepting payment by one ofthe relevant methods are greater than those incurred bythe trader in accepting payment by another of them.
(5) A trader who contravenes subsection (3) commits an offence
and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penalties pro-vided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(6) In proceedings for an offence under this section, where evi-
dence is given that on a particular occasion the defendant acceptedpayment in respect of the product concerned by a relevant methodwhich was different from that which the defendant accepted inrespect of the product on another occasion in the period of 12months preceding the first-mentioned occasion (and that previousmethod is also a relevant method), then it shall be presumed, untilthe contrary is proved, that a practice existed on the part of thedefendant to accept payment in respect of the product by those fore-going methods.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
49.—(1) Where it is the practice of a trader to accept payment in
respect of a product—
(a) by only one relevant method and to impose a charge on a
person for the person’s making payment in respect of theproduct by that method, or
(b) by different relevant methods and to impose on a person
the same charge for the person’s making payment inrespect of the product by any of those methods,
the trader shall ensure that any representation made by the trader,
or on the trader’s behalf, in relation to the price payable in respectof the product, states clearly that price as a single amount inclusiveof the foregoing charge.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) , it is immaterial that the
trader also accepts payment in respect of the product concerned byone or more methods of payment that are not relevant methods ofpayment and the reference in that subsection to the practice of atrader to accept payment in respect of a product by only one relevantmethod shall be read accordingly.
(3) A trader who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence
and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penalties pro-vided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(4) In a case falling within paragraph (a) or(b)ofsubsection (1) ,
nothing in that subsection prevents the inclusion in any represen-tation referred to in that subsection of—
(a) an indication that the single price stated is inclusive of a
charge for making payment by the method concerned or,as the case may be, any of the methods concerned, or
(b) an indication of the amount of such charge.
(5) In this section ‘relevant method’, in relation to payment, has
the same meaning as it has in section 48 .
50.—(1) Subject to subsection (5) , if the Minister considers it to
be in the interest of consumers to have a product, or a class or typeof product, marked with or accompanied by any information (orboth), the Minister may make regulations—
(a) prescribing the product or class or type of product,
(b) prescribing—
(i) any stamps, marks, tags and labels for use on those
products and the manner of their use, or
(ii) any information to accompany those products when
they are supplied to consumers by traders, or
(iii) the matters referred to in both of the foregoing subpa-
ragraphs,
(c) requiring traders who supply a prescribed product, or a
product of a prescribed class or type, to—
47Pt.3
Requirement that
surcharge (whereotherwisepermissible) bestated as part ofprice.
Consumer
informationregulations.Pt.3 S.50
48[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(i) stamp, mark, tag or label them in accordance with
regulations made under paragraph (b)(i) ,o r
(ii) have prescribed information under paragraph (b)(ii)
accompany those products in the manner and formspecified in the regulations, or
(iii) do the things referred to in both of the foregoing sub-
paragraphs,
and
(d) regulating or prohibiting the supply of a prescribed prod-
uct, or a product of a prescribed class or type, if any regu-lation under paragraph (b) or(c)is not complied with.
(2) Subject to subsection (5) , if the Minister considers it to be in
the interest of consumers that advertisements for a product, or aclass or type of product, contain or refer to any information relatingto those products (or do both those things), the Minister may makeregulations—
(a) prescribing the product, or class or type of product, and
that information, and
(b) requiring traders who market or advertise those products
to do either or both of the following, as the Minister con-siders necessary or appropriate:
(i) include that information in their advertisements and
to do so in the manner and form specified in theregulations;
(ii) specify in their advertisements the means by which
that information may be obtained by a consumer.
(3) The Minister may make different regulations under this
section for—
(a) different classes or types of products or traders,
(b) different classes or types of advertisements,
(c) different circumstances, and
(d) different geographical areas of the State.
(4) A regulation made under this section may apply to the whole
State or to a specified geographical area of the State.
(5) The Minister may not make a regulation under this section
unless the Minister is satisfied that in the context—
(a) the average consumer would need the stamp, mark, tag,
label or information in order to make an informed trans-actional decision (“material information”), and
(b) if such material information was withheld, omitted or con-
cealed, it would be likely to cause the average consumerto make a transactional decision that the average con-sumer would not otherwise make.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(6) Subsection (5) does not apply in respect of regulations that
may be made under subsection (1) relating to indications of the stan-
dard of fineness of articles of precious metal.
51.—(1) A trader who supplies a product in contravention of a
regulation under section 50(1) commits an offence.
(2) If an advertisement fails to comply with any requirement of a
regulation under section 50(2) , any trader who publishes the adver-
tisement or causes it to be published commits an offence.
(3) A trader who commits an offence under subsection (1) or(2)
is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penalties providedinChapter 4 ofPart 5 .
Chapter 3
Aggressive Commercial Practices
52.—A trader shall not engage in an aggressive commercial
practice.
53.—(1) A commercial practice is aggressive if by harassment,
coercion or undue influence it would be likely to—
(a) cause significant impairment of the average consumer’s
freedom of choice or conduct in relation to the productconcerned, and
(b) cause the average consumer to make a transactional
decision that the average consumer would not otherwisemake.
(2) In determining whether a commercial practice is aggressive
under subsection (1) , the commercial practice shall be considered in
its factual context, taking account of all of its features and the cir-cumstances.
(3) Without limiting subsection (2) , in determining whether the
commercial practice employs harassment, coercion or undue influ-ence, the following shall be taken into account:
(a) the timing, location, nature or persistence of the commer-
cial practice;
(b) the use of threatening or abusive language or behaviour
by the trader;
(c) the exploitation of a consumer’s misfortune or circum-
stance when the trader is aware that the consumer’sjudgment is impaired as a result of the gravity of the mis-fortune or circumstance, in order to influence the con-sumer’s transactional decision;
(d) the imposition of onerous or disproportionate non-con-
tractual barriers by the trader when the consumer wishesto terminate the contract, exercise a contractual right orswitch to another product or trader;
(e) the use of threats by the trader to—
49Pt.3 S.50
Offences:
contraveningconsumerinformationregulations.
General prohibition
on aggressivecommercialpractices.
Aggressive
commercialpractices.Pt.3 S.53
Offence: aggressive
commercialpractices.
Prohibited
commercialpractices.
50[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(i) take action or initiate proceedings against the con-
sumer when the trader has no legal basis for takingsuch action or initiating such proceedings, or
(ii) do something unlawful.
(4) In this section, “undue influence” means exploiting a position
of power in relation to a consumer so as to apply pressure (withoutnecessarily using or threatening to use physical force) in a way thatsignificantly limits the consumer’s ability to make an informed choicein relation to the trader’s product.
54.—A trader who engages in any aggressive commercial practice
described in section 53(1) commits an offence and is liable on convic-
tion on indictment or on summary conviction, as the case may be, tothe fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
Chapter 4
Prohibited Commercial Practices
55.—(1) A trader shall not engage in any of the following com-
mercial practices:
(a) a representation that the trader has an approval, authoris-
ation or endorsement that the trader does not have, ormaking such a representation when the trader is not incompliance with that approval, authorisation orendorsement;
(b) a representation that the trader is signatory to a code of
practice, if the trader is not;
(c) a representation that the trader is about to cease trading
or move premises, if the trader is not;
(d) a representation that a product has an approval, authoris-
ation or endorsement that it does not have, or makingsuch a representation when the trader is not in com-pliance with that approval, authorisation or endorsement;
(e) a representation that a product is able to facilitate winning
in games of chance;
(f) a representation that supply of a product is legal, if it is
not, or creating such an impression;
(g) a representation that a product is able to cure an illness,
dysfunction or malformation, if it cannot;
(h) a representation that describes a product as “gratis”,
“free”, “without charge” or anything similar, if a con-sumer has to pay anything other than the necessary andreasonable cost of—
(i) responding to the representation, and
(ii) collecting the product or having it delivered;
(i) a representation that a commercial practice of the trader
has an approval, authorisation or endorsement that it[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
does not have, or making such a representation when the
trader is not in compliance with the approval, authoris-ation or endorsement;
(j) a representation that a code of practice has an approval or
other endorsement that it does not have;
(k) displaying a quality, standard or trust mark or symbol, or
some equivalent type of mark or symbol, without havingobtained necessary authorisation to do so;
(l) making an invitation to purchase a product without dis-
closing the existence of any reasonable grounds thetrader may have for believing that the trader will not beable to supply, or procure another trader to supply, theproduct or an equivalent product at the price specified inthe invitation, or to do so for a reasonable period of timeor in reasonable quantities, having regard to the scale ofany marketing or advertising of the product and the pricespecified (bait advertising);
(m) making an invitation to purchase a product, then—
(i) demonstrating a defective sample of the product, or
(ii) refusing to—
(I) show or display the product to the consumer,
(II) take an order from the consumer for the prod-
uct, or
(III) deliver the product to the consumer within a
reasonable period of time,
with the intention of promoting a different product (bait
and switch);
(n) making a false representation that a product is available
only for a limited time, or on particular terms for a lim-ited time, in order to elicit an immediate decision from aconsumer, depriving the consumer of sufficient oppor-tunity or time to make an informed choice in relation tothe trader’s product;
(o) subject to subsection (2) , providing after-supply service to
a consumer in a language that is not an official languageof the relevant State in which the trader is located, nor isit the language in which the trader and consumer com-municated prior to the agreement to supply;
(p) making a representation or creating an impression that a
right given to consumers under an enactment is a distinc-tive feature of the trader’s promotion or supply;
(q) using editorial content in the media to promote a product
(if a trader has paid for that promotion) if it is not madeclear that the promotion is a paid promotion, whether inthe content itself or in any oral, written, visual or descrip-tive representation in the promotion;
(r) making a representation to a consumer that is materially
inaccurate in respect of the nature and extent of risk to
51Pt.3 S.55Pt.3 S.55
52[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
the consumer’s personal security, or that of other
members of the consumer’s household, if the consumerdoes not purchase the trader’s product;
(s) promoting a product (similar to that of another
manufacturer) in such a manner as to deliberately mis-lead or deceive a consumer into thinking that the productis manufactured by that manufacturer, when it is not;
(t) making a representation to a consumer that is inaccurate
to a material degree in respect of market conditions, orin respect of the possibility of finding a product, with theintention of inducing the consumer to purchase a productat conditions less favourable than normal marketconditions;
(u) operating, running or promoting a competition or prize
promotion without awarding the prizes described orreasonable equivalents;
(v) making a representation or creating an impression that a
consumer has won or will win a prize or other equivalentbenefit, if—
(i) there is no prize or equivalent benefit, or
(ii) in claiming the prize, the consumer has to make a pay-
ment or incur a loss;
(w) including in marketing material an invoice or any similar
document seeking payment from a consumer for a prod-uct that the consumer has not ordered;
(x) making a representation or creating an impression that
the trader—
(i) is not acting for purposes related to the trader’s trade,
business or profession, when the trader is so acting,or
(ii) is acting as a consumer, when the trader is not;
(y) making a representation or creating an impression that
after-supply service in relation to a product is availablein a relevant State other than the one in which the prod-uct is supplied, when it is not so available.
(2) Subsection (1)(o) does not apply in either of the following
cases:
(a) prior to the agreement to supply, the trader clearly dis-
closes to the consumer the language or languages inwhich the after-supply service is available;
(b) the primary language in which the trader and consumer
communicated prior to the agreement to supply is theofficial language of the relevant State in which the traderis located but is not the official language of the relevantState of the consumer.
(3) A trader shall not engage in any of the following commercial
practices:[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(a) making a representation or creating an impression that a
consumer cannot leave the premises until a contract isformed;
(b) failing to comply with a consumer’s request to leave the
consumer’s residence or to not return (except in circum-stances and to the extent justified or permitted by orunder law in order to enforce a contractual obligation);
(c) persistently failing to comply with a consumer’s request
to cease—
(i) communicating or initiating unwanted or unsolicited
contact with, or
(ii) making or sending unwanted or unsolicited represen-
tations to,
the consumer by telephone, fax, email or any other elec-
tronic means or remote media (except in circumstancesand to the extent justified or permitted by or under lawin order to enforce a contractual obligation);
(d) in relation to a consumer’s claim on an insurance policy,
doing either or both of the following:
(i) requiring the consumer to produce documents irrel-
evant to the validity of the claim;
(ii) persistently failing to respond to the consumer’s cor-
respondence on the matter, in order to dissuade theconsumer from exercising contractual rights inrespect of that claim;
(e) including in an advertisement a direct exhortation to chil-
dren to—
(i) purchase a product, or
(ii) persuade a parent or adult to purchase the product
for them;
(f) in relation to any product that a consumer does not solicit,
demanding that the consumer—
(i) make immediate or deferred payment for the prod-
uct, or
(ii) return or keep the product safe;
(g) explicitly informing a consumer that if the consumer does
not purchase a product, the trader’s job or livelihood willbe in jeopardy.
(4) Subsection (3)(f) does not apply in respect of a product pro-
vided by a trader in accordance with Regulation 9(3) of the Euro-pean Communities (Protection of Consumers in Respect of Con-tracts Made by Means of Distance Communication) Regulations2001 (S.I. No. 207 of 2001).
53Pt.3 S.55Pt.3
Offence: prohibited
commercialpractices.
Price display
regulations.
Offence: price
displaycontraventions.
Offence: weighing
facilities in groceryretail.
54[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
56.—A trader who contravenes section 55(1) or(3)commits an
offence and is liable on conviction on indictment or on summaryconviction, as the case may be, to the fines and penalties providedinChapter 4 ofPart 5 .
57.—(1) If the Minister considers it to be in the interest of con-
sumers, the Minister may make regulations requiring traders whosupply a product, or a class or type of product, to display the priceor charge to consumers of or for those products in any manner orform specified in the regulations.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1) , a regulation under this
section may—
(a) require prices or charges, or any combination of prices and
charges, to be displayed in a single amount and inclusiveof any charges, fees or taxes payable,
(b) require the price or charge display, or combined price and
charge display, to state the range of prices or charges forthe products, and
(c) prohibit the supply of the products to consumers at any
price greater than the price or charge so displayed.
(3) The Minister may make different regulations under this
section for different classes or types of products or traders.
(4) A regulation made under this section may apply to the whole
State or to a prescribed geographical area of the State.
(5) This section is in addition to section 49 (respecting certain sur-
charges being stated as part of price).
58.—A trader who contravenes a regulation under section 57 com-
mits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to the fines andpenalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
59.—(1) In this section, “grocery retailer” means a trader who is
a retailer within the meaning of section 15A of the CompetitionAct 2002.
(2) A grocery retailer who offers food for sale to consumers by
weight (other than food packed for sale by its manufacturer or pro-ducer or by the person who supplied it for sale) shall—
(a) provide a weighing scale, or weighing machine, that—
(i) is in a public and prominent position on the premises
where that food is sold, and
(ii) subject to health and food safety considerations, is as
near as reasonably possible to where that food is ondisplay for sale,
and
(b) allow any person purchasing, or about to purchase, such
food to weigh it or observe its weighing on the weighingscale or weighing machine in a manner that allows the[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
person to see the reading of the weight provided by the
scale or machine and to be informed of the resultant pricebefore payment.
(3) A grocery retailer who contravenes subsection (2)(a) or(b)
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to the finesand penalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
60.—(1) A trader shall not, without reasonable cause, prevent a
person from, or obstruct or interfere with that person in—
(a) reading the prices displayed on or in relation to products
supplied by the trader, or
(b) entering premises for purposes described in paragraph (a) ,
if those premises are where the trader supplies thoseproducts.
(2) A trader who contravenes subsection (1)(a) or(b)commits an
offence and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penaltiesprovided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
61.—(1) If the Government are of the opinion that abnormal cir-
cumstances prevail or are likely to prevail in relation to the supplyof a product, the Government may by order (“emergency order”)declare that a state of emergency affecting the supply of that prod-uct exists.
(2) An emergency order may relate to one or more products and
may define the products in such manner as the Government think fit.
(3) Unless the term of an emergency order is extended under sub-
section (4) or(5)or the order is revoked, an emergency order—
(a) remains in force for such term (not exceeding 6 months
from the date that the order is made) that the Govern-ment think proper and specify in the order, and
(b) expires at the end of the last day of the term specified.
(4) Subject to subsection (5) , if an emergency order is in force
(“principal order”) and the Government are of the opinion thatabnormal circumstances continue to prevail in relation to the supplyof a product to which the order relates, the Government may makeone order (“extension order”) in relation to that product extendingthe term of the principal order as it relates to that product for aperiod not exceeding 6 months from the date that the extensionorder is made.
(5) If during the extended term under subsection (4) , the Govern-
ment are of the opinion that abnormal circumstances continue toprevail in relation to the supply of the product to which the extensionorder relates, the Government may make only one more order(“final extension order”) in relation to that product extending theterm of the principal order as it relates to that product for a periodnot exceeding 6 months from the date that the final extension orderis made.
55Pt.3 S.59
Offence: preventing
the reading ofprices.
State of emergency
affecting supply of aproduct.Pt.3
Power to fix
maximum pricesduring state ofemergency.
Offence:
contraveningmaximum priceorders.
Definition ( Part 4 ).
56[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
62.—(1) If an emergency order is in force in respect of a product
under section 61 , the Government may by order fix the maximum
price at which that product may be supplied by a trader toconsumers.
(2) An order under subsection (1) may—
(a) limit the application of the order to a class or type of the
product,
(b) specify conditions by reference to which a maximum price
is fixed and may fix different maximum prices in relationto different conditions,
(c) apply to the whole State, to a particular geographical area
in the State, or to the supply of the product by a part-icular class or type of trader,
(d) fix a maximum price by specifying it or by specifying the
manner in which it is to be calculated, and
(e) provide for any incidental or ancillary matter (including a
requirement that the product to which the order relatesshall be sold only in specified units of weight, measureor volume) that the Government consider necessary orexpedient to give full effect to any provision of the orderor to secure compliance with it.
(3) Unless previously revoked, an order made under this section
expires on the expiration of the emergency order in respect of whichit is made.
63.—A trader who contravenes an order made under section 62
commits an offence and is liable on conviction on indictment or onsummary conviction, as the case may be, to the fines and penaltiesprovided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
PART 4
Pyramid Promotional Schemes
64.—(1) In this Part, “pyramid promotional scheme” means a
scheme by which a person gives consideration in money or money’sworth, or gives a gift in money or money’s worth, for an opportunityto receive compensation derived primarily from the introduction ofother persons into the scheme rather than from the supply or con-sumption of a product.
(2) The following apply in respect of subsection (1) :
(a) the opportunity to receive compensation need not be lim-
ited to the person’s introduction of other persons into thescheme but may include their introduction by otherpersons;
(b) the scheme may but need not involve the supply of a
product.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
65.—(1) A person shall not—
(a) establish, operate or promote a pyramid promotional
scheme,
(b) knowingly participate in such a scheme, or
(c) induce or attempt to induce another person to participate
in such a scheme.
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence.
(3) In proceedings for an offence under this section or for a pro-
hibition order under section 71 , it shall not be necessary for the pros-
ecution or the applicant, as the case may be, to prove—
(a) that the opportunity to receive compensation was a legally
enforceable right,
(b) that the consideration or gift given, as the case may be,
was given within the State,
(c) that giving consideration or a gift was the only require-
ment a person had to satisfy in order to—
(i) participate or be eligible to participate in the
scheme, or
(ii) be eligible or have opportunity to receive compen-
sation under the scheme,
(d) that any compensation received was received within the
State,
(e) that any opportunity to receive compensation was to be a
receipt of such compensation within the State, or
(f) that any arrangements under the scheme were recorded
in writing.
(4) If, in proceedings for an offence under this section or for a
prohibition order under section 71 , the alleged pyramid promotional
scheme involves the supply of a product, then the following may beconsidered (among other things) in determining whether the oppor-tunity to receive compensation is derived primarily from the intro-duction of other persons into the scheme:
(a) in respect of a promotion of the scheme, the emphasis
given to a participant’s entitlement to the product, ascompared to the emphasis given to compensation derivedfrom the introduction of other persons into the scheme;
(b) the extent to which the consideration given bears a reason-
able relationship to the product, by reference to the priceof the same or a comparable product available elsewhere.
(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on
conviction on indictment to the fines and penalties provided in Chap-
ter 4 ofPart 5 .
57Pt.4
Indictable offence:
participating in,establishing,operating orpromoting pyramidpromotionalschemes.Pt.4
Pyramid
promotional schemeagreements void.
Definition ( Part 5 ).
Presumption
respectingrepresentations.
Advertisers.
58[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
66.—(1) An agreement between a scheme promoter and another
person is, to the extent it requires or provides for payment of moneyor money’s worth in respect of a pyramid promotional scheme, voidand has no effect, and no action lies in any court for the recovery ofsuch money or money’s worth under or pursuant to such agreement.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) , a “scheme promoter”
means a person who establishes, operates or promotes a pyramidpromotional scheme or who induces or attempts to induce others toparticipate in such a scheme, and includes any person acting on ascheme promoter’s behalf.
PART 5
Proceedings, Remedies and Penalties
Chapter 1
Interpretation and General Matters related to Proceedings
67.—In this Part “prohibited act or practice” means any of the
following:
(a) any unfair, misleading or aggressive commercial practice
under Part 3 ;
(b) any contravention of section 48(3) or49(1) ;
(c) any contravention of section 55(1) or(3),59(2) or60(1) ;
(d) any contravention of section 65(1) ;
(e) any contravention of a regulation under section 50 or57
or an order referred to in section 92 ;
(f) any contravention of an order under section 62(1) ,
but subject to the exclusion of one or more of the foregoing pro-
visions provided for in section 71 ,73,74or75.
68.—If, in any proceedings under this Act, the truth of a factual
claim in a representation is an issue and the trader who made therepresentation, or on whose behalf the representation was made,does not establish on the balance of probabilities that it is true, thenthe representation shall be presumed to be untrue.
69.—(1) In this section:
“advertiser” means a person who publishes advertisements;“contravening advertisement” means—
(a) an unfair, misleading or aggressive commercial practice in
the form of an advertisement, or
(b) an advertisement that is—
(i) a prohibited commercial practice under section 55(1)
or(3),[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(ii) in contravention of section 49(1) ,o r
(iii) in contravention of a regulation under section 50(2) .
(2) An advertiser who publishes a contravening advertisement on
behalf of a trader does not commit an offence under section 47 ,49(3) ,
51(2) or56and is not liable under section 74 (respecting consumer’s
right of action for damages) if the advertiser proves that the adver-tiser did not know and had no reason to suspect that its publicationwould be in contravention of section 41(1) ,42,49(1) ,50(2) ,51(2) ,
52,54,55(1) or(3)or56.
(3) An advertiser who accepts or agrees to publish an advertise-
ment for a trader shall—
(a) make a record of the name and address of that trader, and
(b) keep that record for not less than 2 years from the last day
on which the advertisement is published.
(4) An advertiser who contravenes subsection (3) commits an
offence and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penaltiesprovided in Chapter 4 .
70.—(1) If, in relation to a commercial practice of a trader, the
trader commits an offence under this Act and its commission is dueto the act or default of another person, that other person shall alsobe guilty of an offence and may be charged with and convicted ofit whether or not proceedings for an offence are brought againstthe trader.
(2) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on
conviction to the same range of fines and penalties provided in Chap-
ter 4 that the trader referred to in subsection (1) is or would be liable
in respect of that offence.
Chapter 2
Civil Proceedings
71.—(1) In this section “prohibited act or practice” does not
include a contravention of section 59(2) (respecting weighing facili-
ties in grocery retail) or section 60(1) (respecting preventing the
reading of prices).
(2) Any person, including the Agency or any other public body
that is prescribed for the purposes of this subsection, may apply tothe Circuit Court or High Court for an order prohibiting a trader orperson from committing or engaging in a prohibited act or practice.
(3) An application under subsection (2) shall be on notice to—
(a) the trader or person against whom the order is sought, and
(b) the Agency, if the applicant is not the Agency.
(4) In determining an application under this section, the court
shall consider all interests involved and, in particular, the publicinterest.
59Pt.5 S.69
Offence of trader
due to act ordefault of anotherperson.
Civil relief by way
of prohibitionorders.Pt.5 S.71
Prohibition orders
against codeowners.
60[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(5) If the applicant for an order under this section is not the
Agency, the court may not make the order unless the Agency hasbeen afforded an opportunity to be heard and adduce evidence.
(6) If the court considers it necessary or appropriate in the cir-
cumstances, taking into account all interests involved and, in part-icular, the public interest, the court may make an order under thissection without proof of any actual loss or damage or of any intentionor negligence on the part of the trader.
(7) In making an order under this section, the court may impose
terms or conditions in the order that the court considers appropriate,including a requirement that the trader or person publish a correctivestatement, at the trader’s or person’s own expense and in any mannerthe court considers appropriate, in respect of the matters the subjectof the order.
(8) An application under this section to the Circuit Court shall be
made to the judge of the Circuit Court for the circuit in which theprohibited act or practice concerned is being committed or engagedin.
(9) The Circuit Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and deter-
mine an application under this section which it is satisfied it is appro-priate for it to deal with as a court of local and limited jurisdictionand, for the purpose of the court’s satisfying itself of that matter, thematters to which it shall have regard include—
(a) the nature and extent of the prohibited act or practice con-
cerned, and
(b) the estimated cost of complying with the order to which
the application relates.
(10) If, in relation to an application under this section to the Cir-
cuit Court, that court becomes of the opinion, during the hearing ofthe application, that it is not appropriate for the Circuit Court todeal with the application, it may, if it so thinks fit, transfer the appli-cation to the High Court.
(11) Subsection (10) is without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the
Circuit Court to determine an application under this section which,at the time of the making of the application, it was satisfied it hadjurisdiction to deal with.
(12) Where an application is transferred under subsection (10) to
the High Court, the High Court shall be deemed to have made anyorder of a procedural nature that was made by the court from whichit is so transferred in the proceedings in relation to the application.
(13) A trader commits an offence who, without reasonable
excuse, fails to comply with an order under this section and is liableon conviction on indictment or on summary conviction, as the casemay be, to the fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 .
72.—(1) In this section, “code owner” means, in relation to a code
of practice, any person responsible for formulating or revising thecode or for monitoring compliance by those traders who agree, com-mit or undertake to abide or be bound by it.
(2) If a code of practice or its code owner promotes any pro-
hibited act or practice, the Agency may apply to the Circuit Court[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
or High Court for an order prohibiting the code owner from such
promotion or requiring the code owner to withdraw the code oramend it as the court considers necessary to prevent such promotion.
(3) An application under subsection (2) shall be on notice to the
code owner.
(4) In determining an application under this section, the court
shall consider all interests involved and, in particular, the publicinterest.
(5) In making an order under subsection (2) , the court may
impose terms or conditions in the order that the court considersappropriate.
(6) Subsections (8) to(12) ofsection 71 apply to an application
under this section as they apply to an application under that sectionwith the following modifications—
(a) the substitution in subsection (8) of “in which the code
owner is promoting the prohibited act or practice con-cerned or in which the code owner resides or carries onany business or profession” for “in which the prohibitedact or practice concerned is being committed or engagedin”, and
(b) the substitution in subsection (9) of the following para-
graph for paragraph (a) :
“(a) the nature and extent of the prohibited act or
practice being promoted by the code of prac-tice concerned or its code owner,”.
(7) A code owner commits an offence who, without reasonable
excuse, fails to comply with an order under this section and is liableon conviction on indictment or on summary conviction, as the casemay be, to the fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 .
73.—(1) In this section “prohibited act or practice” does not
include a contravention of section 59(2) (respecting weighing facili-
ties in grocery retail) or section 60(1) (respecting preventing the
reading of prices).
(2) If the Agency has reason to believe that a trader—
(a) is committing or engaging in a prohibited act or practice,
(b) is about to commit or engage in a prohibited act or prac-
tice, or
(c) has committed or engaged in a prohibited act or practice,
the Agency may accept from the trader a written undertaking that is
signed by the trader in the form and which contains the terms andconditions the Agency determines are appropriate in the cir-cumstances.
(3) If the Agency accepts an undertaking from a trader under this
section, the Agency shall publish the undertaking, or cause it to bepublished, in any form or manner the Agency considers appropriate.
61Pt.5 S.72
Undertakings with
the Agency.Pt.5 S.73
Consumer’s right of
action for damages.
62[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(4) Without limiting subsection (2) , the undertaking may include
one or more of the following terms and conditions:
(a) an undertaking to comply with the provision or provisions
concerned of this Act or regulations under this Act;
(b) an undertaking to refrain from committing or engaging in
any act or practice;
(c) an undertaking to compensate consumers or a class of con-
sumers, including reimbursing any money or returningany other property or thing received from consumers inconnection with a consumer transaction;
(d) an undertaking to publish or cause to be published, at the
trader’s expense, an advertisement containing a correc-tive statement relating to the prohibited act or practice.
(5) If the trader under subsection (2) is a body corporate, the
undertaking shall be signed by a director, manager, secretary orother officer of the trader.
(6) The Agency may terminate proceeding against a trader under
section 71 (respecting civil relief by way of prohibition orders) on the
acceptance of an undertaking from the trader.
(7) Despite subsection (6) , the Agency may apply for an order
against a trader under section 71 if the trader fails to comply with
the terms and conditions of an undertaking under this section.
(8) Subsections (2) to(5)shall, with the following modifications
and any other necessary modifications, apply in respect of any traderthe Agency has reason to believe is contravening, is about to contra-vene or has contravened an enactment specified in Schedule 4,
namely, the modifications that—
(a) references in those subsections to a prohibited act or prac-
tice shall be read as references to a contravention of anenactment specified in that Schedule, and
(b) the reference in subsection (4)(a) to the provision or pro-
visions concerned of this Act or regulations under thisAct shall be read as a reference to the provision or pro-visions concerned of that enactment.
(9) If compensation is paid to a consumer pursuant to an under-
taking referred to in subsection (4)(c) and the consumer subsequently
commences an action under section 74 and is awarded damages by
the court in respect of the same prohibited act or practice, the com-pensation paid under the undertaking is deemed to be in satisfactionof so much of the awarded damages as is equal to the amount paidto the consumer under that undertaking.
74.—(1) In this section, “prohibited act or practice” does not
include—
(a) a misleading commercial practice described in section 45 ,
or
(b) a contravention of section 65(1) (respecting pyramid pro-
motional schemes).[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(2) A consumer who is aggrieved by a prohibited act or practice
shall have a right of action for relief by way of damages, includingexemplary damages, against the following:
(a) any trader who commits or engages in the prohibited act
or practice;
(b) if such trader is a body corporate, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the trader, or a person whopurported to act in any such capacity, who authorised orconsented to the doing of the act or the engaging in ofthe practice.
(3) Subject to subsection (4) , an action under this section may be
brought in the District Court, the Circuit Court or the High Courtand such a court may, in that action, award such damages as thecourt considers appropriate, including exemplary damages.
(4) If the action is brought in the District Court or the Circuit
Court, any relief by way of damages, including exemplary damages,shall not, except by consent of the necessary parties in such form asmay be provided for by rules of court, be in excess of the limit ofjurisdiction of the District Court or the Circuit Court, as the casemay be, in an action founded on tort.
(5) Where in an action under this section it is proved that the act
or practice complained of was done or engaged in by a body corpor-ate it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that each (ifany) director of the body and person employed by it whose dutiesincluded making decisions that, to a significant extent, could haveaffected the management of the body, and any other person whopurported to act in any such capacity at the material time, consentedto the doing of that act or the engaging in of that practice.
Chapter 3
Compliance Notices
75.—(1) In this section “prohibited act or practice” does not
include a contravention of a regulation under section 57 (respecting
price display regulations).
(2) An authorised officer who is of the opinion that a person is
committing or engaging in, or has committed or engaged in, a pro-hibited act or practice or is contravening or has contravened anenactment specified in Schedule 5 may serve, personally or by post,
a written notice on that person (a “compliance notice”).
(3) A compliance notice shall be signed and dated by the author-
ised officer and shall—
(a) contain a statement of the alleged contravention
(identifying the relevant enactment), the opinion referredto in subsection (2) and the reasons for that opinion,
(b) direct the person to remedy the contravention or the
matters occasioning that notice, including any otherrequirement that the authorised officer considers appro-
priate in order to remedy the contravention or matter(the “compliance direction and requirements”),
63Pt.5 S.74
Compliance notices.Pt.5 S.75
64[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(c) specify the date by which the person is to comply with the
compliance direction and requirements,
(d) contain a statement that the person may appeal the notice
to the District Court within 14 days after service of thenotice, including information specifying—
(i) the form and manner of such an appeal, and
(ii) the service address of the Agency for purposes of
notifying the Agency under subsection (6) ,
and
(e) contain a statement that, if an appeal is not made in
accordance with this section and within the time specifiedinparagraph (d) , then—
(i) the notice will be treated as not disputed,
(ii) the person will be deemed to have accepted the notice
and have agreed to comply with the compliancedirection and requirements, and
(iii) any failure or refusal to so comply is an offence and,
on summary conviction, the person will be liable tothe fine and penalties set out in Chapter 4 .
(4) The date specified under subsection (3)(c) shall not be earlier
than the end of the period within which an appeal may be madeunder subsection (5) .
(5) If the person on whom the compliance notice is served wishes
to dispute the notice, the person may, no later than 14 days after thenotice is served and in accordance with this section and in the formand manner specified in the notice, appeal the notice to a judge ofthe District Court in the district court district in which the noticewas served.
(6) A person who appeals under subsection (5) shall at the same
time notify the Agency of the appeal and the grounds for the appealand the Agency shall be entitled to appear, be heard and adduceevidence on the hearing of the appeal.
(7) In determining an appeal under this section, the judge may
confirm, vary or cancel the compliance notice, if satisfied that it isreasonable to do so.
(8) If on appeal the compliance notice is not cancelled, the notice
takes effect on the later of the following:
(a) the day after the day on which the notice is confirmed or
varied on appeal;
(b) if the appeal is withdrawn by the appellant, the day after
the day it is withdrawn;
(c) the day specified in the notice.
(9) If there is no appeal under subsection (5) , the compliance
notice takes effect on the later of the following:
(a) 14 days after the notice is served on the person;[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(b) the day specified in the notice.
(10) An authorised officer may—
(a) withdraw a compliance notice at any time, or
(b) if no appeal is made or pending under subsection (5) ,
extend the date specified in the notice under subsection
(3)(c) .
(11) A person commits an offence who, without reasonable
excuse, fails to comply with a compliance direction or requirementspecified in a compliance notice and, on summary conviction, is liableto the fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 .
(12) Withdrawal of a compliance notice under subsection (10)
does not prevent the service of another compliance notice, whetherin respect of the same matter or a different matter.
(13) If a compliance notice takes effect in accordance with this
section, the Agency shall publish the compliance notice, or cause itto be published, in any form or manner the Agency considersappropriate.
(14) Nothing in this section prevents the commencement of pro-
ceedings for an offence.
Chapter 4
Criminal Proceedings
76.—Notwithstanding any provision in any enactment specifying
the period within which proceedings may be commenced, a pros-ecution for an offence under this Act may be brought at any timewithin 2 years after the date of the alleged commission of the offence.
77.—(1) If an offence under this Act is committed by a body cor-
porate and is proved to have been committed with the consent, con-nivance or approval of, or to have been attributable to any neglecton the part of any person being a director, manager, secretary or anyother officer of the body corporate or a person purporting to act inany such capacity, that person, as well as the body corporate, is guiltyof an offence and is liable to be proceeded against and punished asif that person were guilty of the first-mentioned offence.
(2) If, in a prosecution for an offence against the person referred
to in subsection (1) , it is proved that, at the material time, the person
was a director of the body corporate or an employee of it whoseduties included making decisions that, to a significant extent, couldhave affected the management of the body corporate, or a personwho purported to act in any such capacity, it shall be presumed, untilthe contrary is shown, that the person consented to the doing of theacts or defaults that constitute the offence.
(3) Subsection (2) shall be read as placing on the person referred
to in that subsection an evidential burden only with respect to thematter or matters concerned.
(4) If the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its members,
subsections (1) and (2)apply in relation to the acts or defaults of a
65Pt.5 S.75
Time limit for
institutingproceedings.
Liability for
offences by bodiescorporate.Pt.5 S.77
Defence of due
diligence.
Fines and penalties.
66[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
member in connection with the member’s functions of management
as if that member were a director or manager of the body corporate.
(5) If a body corporate commits an offence under this Act, an
employee, officer, director or agent of the body corporate who auth-orises, permits or acquiesces in the commission of the offence alsocommits an offence, whether or not the body corporate is prosecutedfor the offence.
(6) In a prosecution for an offence under this Act, it is sufficient
proof of the offence to establish that it was committed by anemployee, officer, director or agent of the defendant, whether ornot the employee, officer, director or agent is identified or has beenprosecuted for the offence.
(7) Subsection (6) does not apply if the defendant establishes that
the defendant exercised due diligence to prevent the commission ofthe offence.
78.—(1) In proceedings for an offence under this Act, other than
an offence under section 65(2) , it is a defence for the accused to
prove both of the following:
(a) commission of the offence was due to a mistake or the
reliance on information supplied to the accused or to theact or default of another person, an accident or someother cause beyond the accused’s control;
(b) the accused exercised due diligence and took all reason-
able precautions to avoid commission of the offence.
(2) If the defence provided by subsection (1) involves the alle-
gation that the commission of the offence was due to reliance oninformation supplied by another person or to the act or default ofanother person, the accused shall not, without leave of the court, beentitled to rely on that defence unless, not less than 7 working daysbefore the hearing, the accused has served on the prosecutor writtennotice providing information identifying or assisting in the identifi-cation of that other person.
79.—(1) A person guilty of an offence under this Act (other than
an offence under section 65(2) ) is liable on summary conviction to
the following fines and penalties:
(a) on a first summary conviction for any such offence, to a
fine not exceeding \3,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months or both;
(b) on any subsequent summary conviction for the same
offence or any other offence under this Act (other thanan offence under section 65(2) ), to a fine not exceeding
\5,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12
months or both.
(2) If, after being convicted of an offence, the person referred to
insubsection (1) continues to contravene the requirement or prohib-
ition to which the offence relates, the person is guilty of a furtheroffence on each day that the contravention continues and for eachsuch offence is liable on summary conviction to a fine notexceeding \500.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(3) A person guilty of an offence under this Act (other than an
offence under any of the excluded sections) is liable on convictionon indictment to the following fines and penalties:
(a) on a first conviction on indictment for any such offence,
to a fine not exceeding \60,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 18 months or both;
(b) on any subsequent conviction on indictment for the same
offence or any other offence under this Act (other thanan offence under any of the excluded sections), to a finenot exceeding \100,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 24 months or both.
(4) In subsection (3) “excluded sections” means sections 30(11) ,
(12) and (15),32(3) ,48(5) ,49(3) ,51(1) and (2),58,59(3) ,60(2) ,
65(2) ,69(4) ,75(11) and 101(5).
(5) If, after being convicted of an offence, the person referred to
insubsection (3) continues to contravene the requirement or prohib-
ition to which the offence relates, the person is guilty of a furtheroffence on each day that the contravention continues and for eachsuch offence is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \500, and
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\10,000.
(6) A person guilty of an offence under section 65(2) is liable on
conviction on indictment to a fine not exceeding \150,000 or impris-
onment for a term not exceeding 5 years or both.
(7) If, after being convicted of an offence under section 65(2) ,a
person continues to contravene section 65(1) , the person is guilty of
a further offence on each day that the contravention continues andfor each such offence is liable on conviction on indictment to a finenot exceeding \10,000.
(8) In considering an appropriate penalty under this section for a
trader convicted of an offence under section 47 ,51(2) or56, the court
may take into consideration any advertisement published by or onbehalf of the trader containing corrective statements to remedy theprohibited act or practice in respect of which the trader is convicted.
(9) Section 13 of the Criminal Procedure Act 1967 applies in
relation to an offence under this Act except that the following rangeof fines and penalties are to be substituted for those provided insection 13(3)( a) of the Criminal Procedure Act 1967:
(a) if it is a first conviction for an offence under this Act, the
accused is liable to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or impris-
onment for a term not exceeding 6 months or both;
(b) if it is not a first conviction for an offence under this Act,
the accused is liable to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months orboth.
67Pt.5 S.79Pt.5
Convicted persons
liable for costs andexpenses ofproceedings andinvestigation.
Convicted traders
liable tocompensateconsumers for lossor damage.
68[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
80.—(1) On convicting a person of an offence under this Act, the
court shall, unless satisfied that there are special and substantialreasons for not so doing, order the person to pay to the Agency thecosts and expenses, measured by the court, incurred by the Agencyin relation to the investigation, detection and prosecution of theoffence.
(2) An order for costs and expenses under subsection (1) is in
addition to and not instead of any fine or penalty the court mayimpose.
81.—(1) If a trader is convicted of an offence under this Act
(other than an offence under section 65(2) ), the Agency may, on
behalf of an aggrieved consumer who consents to the application,apply to the court for an order (a “compensation order”) requiringthe trader (the “trader concerned”) to pay an amount of money thecourt considers appropriate compensation in respect of any loss ordamage to that consumer resulting from that offence.
(2) A compensation order may be instead of or in addition to any
fine or penalty the court may impose on the trader concerned.
(3) The compensation payable under a compensation order—
(a) shall be of such amount as the court considers appropriate
(though not exceeding the amount set by law as the limitof the court’s jurisdiction in tort), having regard to anyevidence and to any submissions made by or on behalf ofthe trader concerned, the aggrieved consumer, theAgency or the prosecutor, and
(b) shall not exceed the amount of the damages that, in the
opinion of the court, the aggrieved consumer would beentitled to recover in an action under section 74
(respecting a consumer’s right of action for damages) inrespect of the same prohibited act or practice.
(4) An application shall not be made under subsection (1) if the
aggrieved consumer has brought an action under section 74 against
the trader concerned and the action is in respect of the same pro-hibited act or practice for which the trader concerned is convicted.
(5) If the amount of compensation payable under a compensation
order is paid to the aggrieved consumer under this section and theconsumer subsequently commences an action under section 74 and is
awarded damages by the court in respect of the same prohibited actor practice, the compensation order is deemed to be in satisfactionof so much of the awarded damages as is equal to the first-men-tioned amount.
(6) If the trader concerned does not comply with a compen-
sation order—
(a) within the time ordered by the court, or
(b) within 30 days after the order is made, if no time is speci-
fied in the order,
the aggrieved consumer may enter judgment in the District Court or,
as appropriate, the Circuit Court by filing the order with that courtin the District Court district or, as appropriate, the circuit where theconviction was entered.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(7) A judgment entered in the District Court or the Circuit Court
under subsection (6) is enforceable against the trader concerned in
the same manner as if it were a judgment rendered in that court incivil proceedings.
82.—(1) This section applies to a person—
(a) convicted of an offence under section 47 (respecting mis-
leading commercial practices), 56(respecting prohibited
commercial practices) or 65(2) (respecting pyramid pro-
motional schemes), or
(b) convicted of such an offence pursuant to section 70(1)
(respecting offences of traders due to act or default ofanother person).
(2) On conviction of the person to whom this section applies and
on application of the Agency, the court may, in addition to any fineor penalty imposed, order the person to publish, at the person’sexpense and in any manner the court considers appropriate, the factsrelating to the commission of the offence and a corrective statementin respect of those facts.
(3) The court may, based on the submissions of the Agency in the
application and as the court considers appropriate, specify the formand content of the corrective statement or give any directions inrespect of the publication of that statement.
83.—(1) If a person is indicted for an offence under this Act, the
District Court may try the person summarily if—
(a) the court is of opinion that the facts proved or alleged
constitute a minor offence fit to be tried summarily,
(b) the accused, on being informed by the court of his or her
right to be tried with a jury, does not object to being triedsummarily, and
(c) the Director of Public Prosecutions consents to the
accused being tried summarily for the offence.
(2) On conviction by the court for an offence under section 65(2)
that is tried summarily under subsection (1) , the following apply:
(a) the accused is liable to the following fines and penalties:
(i) if it is a first conviction for an offence under this Act,
to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 6 months or both;
(ii) if it is not a first conviction for an offence under this
Act, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months or both;
(b)section 80 (respecting liability for costs and expenses of
proceedings and investigation);
(c)section 82 (publication of a corrective statement).
(3) However, if after conviction referred to in subsection (2) , the
accused continues to contravene section 65(1) , the accused is guilty
69Pt.5 S.81
Court may order
convicted person topublish correctivestatement.
Summary trial of
persons indicted.Pt.5 S.83
Agency may
institute summaryproceedings foroffences.
Fixed payment
notices for pricedisplay and productpricing offences.
70[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
of a further offence on each day that the contravention continues
and for each such offence is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \500, and
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\10,000.
(4) On conviction by the court for any offence that is tried sum-
marily under subsection (1) other than an offence under section
65(2) , the following apply:
(a) the accused is liable to the fines and penalties described in
section 79(1) (respecting fines and penalties);
(b)section 80 (respecting liability for costs and expenses of
proceedings and investigation);
(c)section 82 (publication of a corrective statement).
84.—Summary proceedings for an offence under this Act, except
an offence under section 65(2) , may be brought and prosecuted by
the Agency.
Chapter 5
Fixed Payment Notices
85.—(1) This section applies in respect of any offence under the
following enactments (in this section referred to as a “relevantoffence”):
(a)section 58 (respecting price display regulations);
(b) section 22( a)o r( b) of the Prices Act 1958 (respecting
price display orders);
(c) Regulation 4(3), 5(5), 6(3) or 7(2) of the European Com-
munities (Requirements to Indicate Product Prices)Regulations 2002 (S.I. No. 639 of 2002).
(2) An authorised officer who has reasonable grounds for believ-
ing that a person is committing, or has committed, a relevant offencemay serve, personally or by post, the notice referred to in subsection
(3)on the person.
(3) The notice (“fixed payment notice”) shall be in the prescribed
form and state—
(a) that the person on whom it is served is alleged to have
committed the relevant offence concerned,
(b) when and where it is alleged to have been committed,
(c) that a prosecution for it will not be instituted if, during the
period of 28 days beginning on the date of the notice, theperson pays the amount of \300 to the Agency (at the
address stated in the notice) and submits the original ora copy of the fixed payment notice together with thatpayment, and[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(d) that in default of such payment, the person will be pros-
ecuted for the alleged relevant offence.
(4) A payment referred to in subsection (3) shall be accompanied
by the original or a copy of the fixed payment notice concerned.
(5) If a fixed payment notice is served on a person—
(a) the person may make a payment in accordance with sub-
section (3)(c) ,
(b) the Agency shall receive and retain the payment (subject
tosubsection (7) ) and issue a receipt for it,
(c) any payment received shall not be recoverable by the per-
son who made it, and
(d) a prosecution in respect of the alleged relevant offence to
which the notice relates shall not be instituted during theperiod specified in subsection (3)(c) or, if a payment is
made in accordance with subsections (3)(c) and (4), at all.
(6) In proceedings against a person for a relevant offence it shall
be presumed, until the contrary is shown, that the person did notmake payment in accordance with subsections (3)(c) and (4).
(7) Payments received by the Agency under this section shall be
paid into or disposed of for the benefit of the Exchequer in suchmanner as the Minister for Finance directs.
Chapter 6
Publication of Trader Names (Consumer Protection List)
86.—(1) The Agency shall keep and maintain a list (the “con-
sumer protection list”) of names and addresses of the following per-sons, together with a description of their trade, business or professionand the particulars described in subsection (2) :
(a) any person on whom a fine or other penalty was imposed
by a court under the relevant statutory provisions or whowas required, by an order under section 81 , to pay an
amount of money to a consumer;
(b) any person against whom an order is made under section
71(respecting civil relief by way of prohibition orders);
(c) any person who gives an undertaking to the Agency under
section 73 ;
(d) any person against whom a compliance notice takes effect
under section 75(7) or(8) (respecting compliance
notices);
(e) any person who makes payment to the Agency pursuant
to a fixed payment notice under section 85 .
(2) The consumer protection list shall specify, in relation to each
person named in the list, any particulars the Agency considers appro-priate in respect of the following:
71Pt.5 S.85
Agency may publish
informationrespecting certainpersons.Pt.5 S.86
Protections for
persons reportingbreaches.
72[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(a) the matter occasioning any fine or penalty imposed on the
person by the court and the amount or nature of that fineor penalty;
(b) the matter occasioning any order made by the court
against the person and the nature of that order;
(c) the matter occasioning any undertaking given to the
Agency by the person under this Act;
(d) the matter occasioning any compliance notice served on
the person under this Act;
(e) the matter occasioning any fixed payment notice under
this Act.
(3) The Agency may, at any time and in any form or manner the
Agency considers appropriate, publish or cause to be published allor any part of the consumer protection list.
PART 6
Miscellaneous
87.—(1) A person who, apart from this section, would be so liable
shall not be liable in damages in respect of the communication,whether in writing or otherwise, by the person to the Agency of theperson’s opinion that—
(a) an offence under any of the relevant statutory provisions
has been or is being committed, or
(b) any of the relevant provisions that prohibits a person from
doing a particular thing or things has not been or is notbeing complied with,
unless it is proved that the person has not acted reasonably and in
good faith in forming that opinion and communicating it to theAgency.
(2) The reference in subsection (1) to liability in damages shall be
construed as including a reference to liability to be the subject of anorder providing for any other form of relief.
(3) An employer shall not penalise an employee for having for-
med an opinion of the kind referred to in subsection (1) and com-
municated it, whether in writing or otherwise, to the Agency if theemployee has acted reasonably and in good faith in forming thatopinion and communicating it to the Agency.
(4) Schedule 6 shall have effect for the purposes of subsection (3) .
(5) A person who states to the Agency that a person—
(a) has committed or is committing an offence under any of
the relevant statutory provisions, or
(b) has failed or is failing to comply with any of the relevant
statutory provisions,[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
knowing that statement to be false commits an offence and is liable
on conviction on indictment or on summary conviction, as the casemay be, to the fines and penalties provided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(6) Subsection (1) is in addition to, and not in substitution for, any
privilege or defence available in legal proceedings, by virtue of anyenactment or rule of law in force immediately before the commence-ment of this section, in respect of the communication by a person toanother (whether that other person is the Agency or not) of anopinion of the kind referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) ofsubsec-
tion (1) .
88.—(1) Subject to this section, a person representing one or more
traders may submit a code of practice to the Agency for its reviewor approval.
(2) The code of practice shall be submitted in the form and man-
ner specified by the Agency.
(3) The person submitting a code of practice for approval under
this section shall provide the Agency with any information theAgency considers necessary or appropriate for the purposes of sub-
section (4) .
(4) If satisfied that the code of practice protects consumer
interests and is not inconsistent with this Act or any other enactment,the Agency may approve the code of practice.
(5) A code of practice approved by the Agency may not be
amended without approval of the proposed amendments by theAgency and, for this purpose, subsections (3) and (4)apply with the
necessary modifications.
(6) The approval by the Agency of a code of practice or any
amendments to such code shall be in writing.
(7) The Agency may withdraw any approval under this section if
the Agency is of the opinion that, in the implementation or operationof all or part of an approved code of practice or amendment to it,such code, part or amendment fails to protect consumer interests oris in any manner inconsistent with this Act or any other enactment.
(8) If—
(a) it is alleged that a trader who is a signatory to a code of
practice with the approval of the Agency under thissection has contravened this Act or a complaint is madeto the Agency in relation to a commercial practice of thattrader, and
(b) the approved code of practice referred to in paragraph (a)
provides for procedures or a means of handling or con-sidering such contraventions or complaints,
then the Agency may defer consideration of the complaint or the
court may defer hearing an application for a prohibition order undersection 71 (respecting prohibition orders) or an action for damages
under section 74 (respecting a consumer’s right of action for
damages) until the means or procedures referred to in paragraph (b)
have been exhausted.
73Pt.6 S.87
Voluntary
submission of codesfor Agency reviewand approval.Pt.6
Admissibility of
codes of practice inproceedings.
Agency guidelines.
Saving for certain
contracts.
Saving of current
price display orders.
74[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
89.—In any proceedings before a court, a code of practice
(whether approved under section 88 or not) is admissible in evidence
and, if any provision of the code is relevant to a question arisingin those proceedings, the provision may be taken into account indetermining that question.
90.—(1) Subject to this section, the Agency may prepare, issue
and publish guidelines applicable to traders, or persons representingtraders, concerning any of the following:
(a) a matter of consumer welfare or protection;
(b) a matter of practical guidance to traders in relation to
commercial practices, whether generally or in a particulartrade, business or professional sector;
(c) the establishment, form and operation of quality assurance
schemes referred to in section 8(2)(m) ;
(d) the form and manner of submitting codes of practice to
the Agency for approval under section 88 .
(2) Before issuing and publishing guidelines under this section,
the Agency may prepare draft guidelines and consult with any per-son, as the Agency considers appropriate.
(3) If satisfied that proposed or draft guidelines protect consumer
interests, the Agency may issue the guidelines and shall cause themto be published in the manner the Agency considers appropriate forthe purpose.
(4) Without limiting the generality of subsection (3) , the Agency
may publish a copy of guidelines issued by it under this section onthe internet.
(5) In any proceedings before a court, guidelines issued and pub-
lished under this section are admissible in evidence and, if any pro-vision of the guidelines is relevant to a question arising in those pro-ceedings, the provision may be taken into account in determiningthat question.
(6) A failure on the part of any person to observe any provision
of guidelines issued and published under this section shall not, ofitself, render that person liable to any proceedings.
91.—Subject to section 66(1) , a contract for the supply of any
goods or the provision of any services shall not be void or unenforce-able by reason only of a contravention of any provision of this Act.
92.—(1) Notwithstanding section 4 but subject to subsection (2) ,
the following enactments made under section 19 of the Prices Act1958 (before its repeal under this Act) remain in force for the pur-poses of this Act and any provision (in particular, sections 2, 18, 19and 22 to 28) of the Prices Act 1958 that is relevant to the enforce-ment of those orders remain in force:
(a) Prices and Charges (Tax-inclusive Statements) Order 1973
(S.I. No. 9 of 1973);[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(b) Charges (Hairdressing Display) Order 1976 (S.I. No. 156
of 1976);
(c) Retail Price (Food in Catering Establishments) Display
Order 1984 (S.I. No. 213 of 1984);
(d) Retail Price (Diesel and Petrol) Display Order 1997 (S.I.
No. 178 of 1997);
(e) Retail Price (Beverages in Licensed Premises) Display
Order 1999 (S.I. No. 263 of 1999).
(2) The Minister may by regulation amend or revoke any order
referred to in subsection (1) .
93.—(1) Despite section 4 , the following enactments made under
section 11 of the Consumer Information Act 1978 (before its repealby this Act) remain in force and are deemed to have been made asregulations by the Minister under section 50(2) until any such enact-
ment is revoked, substituted by regulation of the Minister undersection 50(2) or otherwise ceases to have effect:
(a) Consumer Information (Advertisements) (Disclosure of
Business Interests) Order 1984 (S.I. No. 168 of 1984);
(b) Consumer Information (Advertisements for Concert or
Theatre Performances) Order 1997 (S.I. No. 103 of 1997);
(c) Consumer Information (Advertisements for Airfares)
Order 2000 (S.I. No. 468 of 2000).
(2) Section 3(2) does not apply to the enactments referred to in
subsection (1)(a) to(c).
(3) For certainty, section 26 of the Interpretation Act 2005 applies
in respect of the repeal of section 11 of the Consumer InformationAct 1978 and its substitution by the provisions of section 50 and, for
this purpose, the enactments specified in subsection (1) are conclus-
ively deemed to be consistent with and validly enacted undersection 50 .
(4) For certainty, the references in sections 51(2) and 69(1) (in
paragraph (b)(iii) of the definition of “contravening advertisement”)
to a regulation under section 50(2) include any enactment referred
to in subsection (1)(a) to(c).
94.—(1) In this section “Act of 1942” means the Central Bank
Act 1942, as amended by, amongst other enactments, the CentralBank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act 2003 and theCentral Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act 2004.
(2) Section 2(1) of the Act of 1942 is amended by inserting, before
the definition of “Appeals Tribunal”, the following:
“ ‘Agency’ means the National Consumer Agency established
by the Consumer Protection Act 2007 ;”.
(3) Section 5A of the Act of 1942 is amended by inserting the
following subsections after subsection (3):
75Pt.6 S.92
Transitional.
Amendment of
Central Bank Act1942.Pt.6 S.94
76[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
“(3A) The functions of the Agency specified in subsection
(3B) are, in so far as they relate to a financial service providedby a regulated financial service provider, also functions of theBank and subsections (3C) to (3F) have effect for the purposesof this subsection.
(3B) The functions of the Agency referred to in subsection
(3A) are the following functions of it under the Consumer Pro-
tection Act 2007 , namely, functions under—
(a)section 8(1) ,(4),(5)and (6)of that Act in relation
to—
(i)sections 41 to56(other than section 50 ) of that
Act, and
(ii) the European Communities (Unfair Terms in
Consumer Contracts) Regulations 1995 and2000 (S.I. No. 27 of 1995 and S.I. No. 307 of2000),
and
(b)sections 30 ,71,72,73,75,81,82,84,86,88and 90of
that Act.
(3C) Subsection (3A) operates to vest in the Bank, concur-
rently with the vesting in the Agency of those functions by theConsumer Protection Act 2007 , the functions specified in subsec-
tion (3B).
(3D) Accordingly—
(a) the functions so specified are, subject to any relevant
co-operation agreement entered into under section
21of the Consumer Protection Act 2007 , capable of
being performed by either the Agency or the Bank,and
(b) subject to subsection (3F), references to the Agency
in the provisions of that Act specified in subsection(3B) are to be read as including references to theBank and those provisions otherwise apply.
(3E) Subject to subsection (3F), sections 80 ,85and 87of the
Consumer Protection Act 2007 apply to the Bank as they apply
to the Agency and, accordingly, references to the Agency inthose sections are to be read as including references to the Bank.
(3F) Where any section of the Consumer Protection Act 2007
specified in subsection (3B) or (3E) provides for anything to bedone in relation to the Agency (whether the giving of notice toit, the submitting of a thing to it or the doing of any other thing)then, if a co-operation agreement entered into under section 21
of that Act so specifies, it is sufficient compliance with thesection concerned if the thing is done in relation to the Agencyor the Bank as is specified in that agreement.”.
(4) Section 33S(2) of the Act of 1942 is amended by substituting
the following paragraph for paragraph ( f):
“(f) the Consumer Protection Act 2007 ;[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(g) the European Communities (Unfair Terms in Con-
sumer Contracts) Regulations 1995 and 2000 (S.I.No. 27 of 1995 and S.I. No. 307 of 2000);
(h) such other enactments and statutory instruments as
are specified in the regulations.”.
(5) Section 33AK(3) of the Act of 1942 is amended, in paragraph
(a), by inserting the following subparagraph after subparagraph (iv):
“(iva) the National Consumer Agency, or”.
(6) Schedule 2 to the Act of 1942 is amended—
(a) in Part 1, by inserting the following item after the item
relating to the Investment Funds, Companies and Miscel-laneous Provisions Act 2006:
“
No. - of 2007 Consumer Protec- The whole Act
tion Act 2007
”,
and
(b) in Part 2—
(i) by inserting the following item after the item relating
to the European Communities (Life Assurance)Framework Regulations 1994 (S.I. No. 360 of 1994):
“
S.I. No. 27 of 1995 European Com- The whole instrument
munities (UnfairTerms in Con-sumer Contracts)Regulations 1995
”,
and
(ii) by inserting the following item after the item relating
to the European Communities (SupplementarySupervision of Insurance Undertakings in anInsurance Group) Regulations 1999 (S.I. No. 399 of1999):
“
S.I. No. 307 of European Com- The whole instrument
2000 munities (Unfair
Terms in Con-sumer Contracts)(Amendment)Regulations 2000
.”.
95.—Section 6 of the Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act
1980 is amended by substituting the following subsections for subsec-tion (2):
77Pt.6 S.94
Amendment of Sale
of Goods andSupply of ServicesAct 1980.Pt.6 S.95
Saving for other
rights person mayhave.
Amendment of
IndustrialDevelopment Act1993.
78[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
“(2) If an offence under this Act is committed by a body cor-
porate and is proved to have been committed with the consent,connivance or approval of, or to have been attributable to anyneglect on the part of any person being a director, manager,secretary or any other officer of the body corporate or a personpurporting to act in any such capacity, that person, as well asthe body corporate, is guilty of an offence and is liable to beproceeded against and punished as if that person were guilty ofthe first-mentioned offence.
(3) If, in a prosecution for an offence against the person
referred to in subsection (2), it is proved that, at the materialtime, the person was a director of the body corporate or anemployee of it whose duties included making decisions that, toa significant extent, could have affected the management of thebody corporate, or a person who purported to act in any suchcapacity, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is shown, thatthe person consented to the doing of the acts or defaults thatconstitute the offence.
(4) Subsection (3) shall be read as placing on the person
referred to in that subsection an evidential burden only withrespect to the matter or matters concerned.
(5) If the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, subsections (2) and (3) apply in relation to the acts ordefaults of a member in connection with the member’s functionsof management as if that member were a director or managerof the body corporate.”.
96.—This Act shall not affect any rights which a person may have
under any other enactment or under any rule of law.
97.—The following section is inserted after section 9 of the Indus-
trial Development Act 1993:
“Validation of
assignment ofpowers andfunctions.9A.—(1) In this section ‘relevant assignment’
means the assignment by Forfa ´s with the approval
of the Minister on 26 May 2006 under section 9(2)to the Industrial Development Agency (Ireland),Enterprise Ireland and Shannon Free AirportDevelopment Company Limited of the power tomake employment grants under section 25 of theIndustrial Development Act 1986.
(2) The relevant assignment shall be deemed to
have come into operation on 25 July 2003.
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect any pro-
ceedings commenced in any court concerning themaking of an employment grant under section 25of the Industrial Development Act 1986 wherethose proceedings were commenced before 1February 2007.”.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
98.—The following section is inserted after section 6 of the Casual
Trading Act 1995:
“Guidelines
with respect toperformanceof functionsunder section6.6A.—(1) The Minister may prepare and issue
to local authorities guidelines, in writing, regard-ing the performance by them of their functionsunder section 6 in relation to bye-laws.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-
section (1), guidelines under this section mayinclude guidelines as to the particular provisionthat a local authority should make by bye-lawsunder section 6 in relation to each of the mattersmentioned in subsection (2) of that section.
(3) Local authorities shall have regard to guide-
lines for the time being in force under this sectionin performing their functions under section 6 inrelation to bye-laws.
(4) The Minister may amend or revoke, in writ-
ing, guidelines issued under this section.
(5) The Minister shall cause a copy of any
guidelines issued under this section and of anyamendment or revocation of them to be laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas.”.
99.—The following sections are substituted for sections 5 and 6 of
the Hallmarking Act 1981:
“False
representationsin relation tocertain articles.5.—(1) Subject to section 6 of this Act, a com-
mercial practice that involves a representation thatan article which is not of precious metal is madewholly or partly of gold, silver or platinum is amisleading commercial practice under section
43(1) and (2)of the Consumer Protection Act
2007 .
(2) A trader who engages in any misleading
commercial practice described in subsection (1) isguilty of an offence under section 47 of the Con-
sumer Protection Act 2007 .
Permissible
representationsin relation tocertain articles.6.—(1) Section 5 of this Act does not apply to a
representation which is permissible under this Act.
(2) A representation is permissible under this
Act if it complies with the following conditions:
(a) it is confined either expressly or by
implication to the colour of the article;
(b) if it consists of or includes the word
‘gold’, that word is qualified by theword ‘plated’ or the word ‘rolled’;
(c) if it consists of or includes the word ‘sil-
ver’ or the word ‘platinum’, whichever
79Pt.6
Amendment of
Casual Trading Act1995.
Amendment of
Hallmarking Act1981.Pt.6 S.99
Power of officer of
customs and exciseto detain unsafegoods.
Directions under
certain instrumentsrespecting productsafety: actions ofthird parties.
80[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
of those words is used is qualified by
the word ‘plated’;
(d) where the representation is in writing
and the word ‘plated’ or ‘rolled’ isused, that word is at least as large asthe rest of the representation.
(3) Subsection (2) of this section does not apply
if the representation is false or is applied to anarticle for which the representation is inap-propriate.
Construction
of certainexpressions insections 5 and6.6A.—In sections 5 and 6 of this Act, ‘commer-
cial practice’, ‘representation’ and ‘trader’ havethe same meaning as they have in the Consumer
Protection Act 2007 .”.
100.—For the purpose of facilitating the performance by the
Agency of any functions conferred on it by any of the relevant statu-tory provisions relating to the safety of products, an officer of cus-toms and excise, when authorised to do so by the Revenue Commis-sioners following a written request in that behalf by the Agency, maydetain any goods being imported for such period as is reasonablynecessary for the Agency to examine the goods, or arrange to havethe goods examined, which period shall not in any case exceed 72hours from the time when the goods concerned are detained.
101.—(1) In this section “relevant direction” means a direction,
for the time being in force, given under any of the statutory instru-ments specified in Schedule 7 , being a direction—
(a) prohibiting the placing on the market of one or more prod-
ucts or requiring one or more products to be withdrawnfrom the market, or
(b) imposing restrictions on the placing on the market of one
or more products.
(2) In this section a reference to a product concerned is a refer-
ence to a product to which the relevant direction relates.
(3) If a relevant direction is given to a person, being a direction
to which subsection (1)(a) applies, any other person who knows of
the direction shall not do any of the following things, namely—
(a) distribute,
(b) sell,
(c) offer for sale,
(d) supply in the course of providing a service,
a product concerned.
(4) If a relevant direction is given to a person, being a direction
to which subsection (1)(b) applies, any other person who knows of
the direction shall not—[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
(a) in a case where the restriction concerned prohibits the
doing of that particular thing in respect of the product —do any particular thing referred to in subsection (3) in
respect of a product concerned, or
(b) in a case where the restriction concerned does not prohibit
the doing of that particular thing in respect of the product— do any particular thing referred to in subsection (3) in
respect of a product concerned otherwise than in accord-ance with the terms of the restriction.
(5) A person who contravenes subsection (3) or(4)commits an
offence and is liable on summary conviction to the fines and penaltiesprovided in Chapter 4 ofPart 5 .
(6) This section is in addition to the provision of any statutory
instrument specified in Schedule 7 that creates an offence in respect
of a contravention of a direction given under that instrument.
102.—(1) A certificate in writing purporting to be signed by a per-
son employed in a relevant laboratory and stating the results of oneor more tests carried out in that laboratory with respect to a productof a specified type shall, without proof of the signature of that personor that he or she is employed in the relevant laboratory, be admiss-ible as evidence of the results of the test or tests in the followingproceedings taken in relation to that type of product.
(2) Those proceedings are proceedings under any of the statutory
instruments specified in Schedule 7 .
(3) In this section ‘relevant laboratory’ means a laboratory the
competence of which to carry out tests in relation to products isrecognised by an authority performing functions under the laws,regulations or administrative provisions adopted by a Member Statefor the purposes of any of the Directives specified in Schedule 8 .
(4) Where a certificate referred to in subsection (1) is produced
in proceedings referred to in subsection (2) , it shall be presumed,
until the contrary is shown, that the laboratory referred to in thecertificate as a relevant laboratory is such a laboratory.
SCHEDULE 1
Existing Enactments
PART 1
Enactments —Acts of the Oireachtas
Number and Short Title
Year
(1) (2)
No. 31 of 1964 Pawnbrokers Act 1964
No. 10 of 1970 Merchandise Marks Act 1970
No. 35 of 1979 Occasional Trading Act 1979
No. 16 of 1980 Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act 1980
81Pt.6 S.101
Admissibility of
certain laboratorytests.
Section 2 .Sch. 1
82[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Number and Short Title
Year
(1) (2)
No. 23 of 1980 Trading Stamps Act 1980
No. 28 of 1991 Liability for Defective Products Act 1991
No. 17 of 1995 Package Holidays and Travel Trade Act 1995
No. 24 of 1995 Consumer Credit Act 1995
No. 28 of 1996 National Standards Authority of Ireland Act 1996
No. 29 of 1998 Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act 1998
PART 2
Enactments made under the European Communities Act 1972
which are existing Enactments
Number and Citation
Year
(1) (2)
S.I. No. 134 of European Communities (Misleading Advertising) Regulations1988 1988
S.I. No. 224 of European Communities (Cancellation of Contracts Negotiated1989 away from Business Premises) Regulations 1989
S.I. No. 32 of European Communities (Safety of Toys) Regulations 1990 and1990 1994S.I. No. 458 of1994
S.I. No. 265 of European Communities (Food Imitations) (Safety) Order 19911991
S.I. No. 101 of European Communities (Appliances Burning Gaseous Fuels)1992 Regulations 1992 and 1995S.I. No. 150 of1995
S.I. No. 428 of European Communities (Low Voltage Electrical Equipment)1992 Regulations 1992 and 1994S.I. No. 307 of1994
S.I. No. 272 of European Communities (Personal Protective Equipment)1993 Regulations 1993 to 1997S.I. No. 13 of1994S.I. No. 457 of1994S.I. No. 81 of1997
S.I. No. 27 of European Communities (Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts)1995 Regulations 1995 and 2000S.I. No. 307 of2000
S.I. No. 63 of European Communities (Labelling of Footwear) Regulations1996 1996
S.I. No. 204 of European Communities (Contracts for Time Sharing of1997 Immovable Property – Protection of Purchasers) Regulations
1997
S.I. No. 144 of European Communities (Contracts for Time Sharing of2000 Immovable Property – Protection for Purchasers) (Amendment)
Regulations 2000
S.I. No. 245 of European Communities (Names and Labelling of Textile1998 Products) Regulations 1998[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Number and Citation
Year
(1) (2)
S.I. No. 254 of European Communities (Definition, Description and1998 Presentation of Aromatized Wines, Aromatized Wine-Based
Drinks and Aromatized Wine-Product Cocktails) Regulations1998
S.I. No. 262 of European Communities (Use of Standards for the Transmission1998 of Television Signals) Regulations 1998
S.I. No. 401 of European Communities (Liability for Defective Products)2000 Regulations 2000
S.I. No. 207 of European Communities (Protection of Consumers in Respect of2001 Contracts made by Means of Distance Communication)
Regulations 2001
S.I. No. 449 of European Communities (Protection of Consumers’ Collective2001 Interests) Regulations 2001
S.I. No. 483 of European Communities (Labelling, Presentation and2002 Advertising of Foodstuffs) Regulations 2002 to 2005S.I. No. 257 of2003S.I. No. 451 of2003S.I. No. 528 of2003S.I. No. 228 of2005S.I. No. 514 of2005S.I. No. 647 of2005
S.I. No. 639 of European Communities (Requirements to Indicate Product2002 Prices) Regulations 2002
S.I. No. 11 of European Communities (Sale of Consumer Goods and2003 Associated Guarantees) Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 68 of European Communities (Directive 2000/31/EC) Regulations2003 2003
S.I. No. 490 of European Communities (Amendment of S.I. No. 68 of 2003)2004 Regulations 2004
S.I. No. 236 of European Communities (Marketing of Cocoa and Chocolate2003 Products) Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 240 of European Communities (Marketing of Fruit Juices and Certain2003 Similar Products) Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 289 of European Communities (Marketing of Sugar Products)2003 Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 294 of European Communities (Marketing of Fruit Jams, Jellies,2003 Marmalades and Sweetened Chestnut Pure ´e) Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 298 of European Communities (Dehydrated Preserved Milk)
2003 Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 307 of European Communities (Electronic Communications, Networks2003 and Services) (Framework) Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 308 of European Communities (Electronic Communications, Networks2003 and Services) (Universal Services and Users’ Rights)
Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 367 of European Communities (Marketing of Honey) Regulations 20032003
S.I. No. 199 of European Communities (General Product Safety) Regulations2004 2004
S.I. No. 397 of European Communities (Marketing Standards for Olive Oil)2004 Regulations 2004
S.I. No. 853 of European Communities (Distance Marketing of Consumer2004 Financial Services) Regulations 2004
83Sch. 1Sch. 1
Section 4 .
84[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Number and Citation
Year
(1) (2)
S.I. No. 290 of European Communities (Co-operation between National2006 Authorities Responsible for the Enforcement of Consumer
Protection Laws) Regulations 2006
SCHEDULE 2
Repeals
Session and Chapter Short Title Extent of Repeal
or Number and Year
(1) (2) (3)
50 & 51 Vic., c. 28 Merchandise Marks Act 1887 The whole Act
54 & 55 Vic., c. 15 Merchandise Marks Act 1891 The whole Act
1 & 2 Geo. 5., c. 31 Merchandise Marks Act 1911 The whole Act
5 & 6 Geo. 5., c. 1 Anglo-Portuguese The whole Act
Commercial Treaty Act 1914
6 & 7 Geo. 5., c. 39 Anglo-Portuguese The whole Act
Commercial Treaty Act 1916
No. 10 of 1930 Agricultural Produce (Fresh Section 27(4) and (5)
Meat) Act 1930
No. 35 of 1930 Portuguese Treaty Act 1930 The whole Act
No. 26 of 1931 Agricultural Produce Section 19(4) and (5)
(Potatoes) Act 1931
No. 48 of 1931 Merchandise Marks Act 1931 The whole Act
No. 6 of 1936 Spanish Trade Agreement The whole Act
Act 1936
No. 14 of 1955 Seed Production Act 1955 Section 22(3)
No. 4 of 1958 Prices Act 1958 The whole Act, except
to the extent specifiedinsection 92
No. 25 of 1968 Road Traffic Act 1968 Section 14(1), (2) and
(3)
No. 20 of 1972 Prices (Amendment) Act The whole Act
1972
No. 1 of 1978 Consumer Information Act The whole Act
1978
No. 11 of 1980 Packaged Goods (Quantity Section 12(1)
Control) Act 1980
No. 27 of 1980 Pyramid Selling Act 1980 The whole Act
No. 31 of 1987 Restrictive Practices The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1987
No. 28 of 1996 National Standards Authority Section 19(3) and 21(7)
of Ireland Act 1996[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 3
References in Certain Acts and Instruments to Director or
Office of Director
PART 1
References in Certain Acts to Director of Consumer Affairs
or Office of the Director of Consumer Affairs
Short Title, Number Provision affected Amendment
and Year
(1) (2) (3)
Ombudsman Act 1980 First Schedule In Part II, delete “the(No. 26 of 1980) Director of Consumer
Affairs”.
Second Schedule Insert “National Consumer
Agency”.
National Archives Act Schedule Substitute “National1986 (No. 11 of 1986) Consumer Agency” for
“Office of the Director ofConsumer Affairs”.
Prompt Payment of Schedule Substitute “NationalAccounts Act 1997 Consumer Agency” for “the(No. 31 of 1997) Office of the Director of
Consumer Affairs”.
Taxes Consolidation Schedule 13 Substitute the following forAct 1997 (No. 39 of paragraph 112 (inserted by1997) section 14 of the Finance Act
2001):
“112. National Consumer
Agency.”.
Electronic Commerce Section 15 Substitute “role of theAct 2000 (No. 27 of National Consumer Agency”2000) for “role of the Director of
Consumer Affairs”.
Competition Act 2002 Schedule 1 (as In column (1), substitute(No. 14 of 2002) amended by the “National Consumer Agency”
Competition Act 2002 for “Director of Consumer(Section 34(11)) Affairs”.(Director ofConsumer Affairs)Order 2003 (S.I. No.130 of 2003)
Ombudsman for Schedule 1 In Part 2, substitute “NationalChildren Act 2002 Consumer Agency” for(No. 22 of 2002) “Director of Consumer
Affairs”.
Personal Injuries Section 56(6) Substitute “the chief executiveAssessment Board Act of the National Consumer2003 (No. 46 of 2003) Agency” for “the Director of
Consumer Affairs”.
Official Languages First Schedule ( a) in paragraph 1 of the Irish
Act 2003 (No. 32 of text—2003)
(i) in subparagraph (1), delete
“Oifig an Stiu ´rtho´ra Gno ´thaı´
Tomhalto ´ irı´”, and
(ii) in subparagraph (2), insert
“An Ghnı ´omhaireacht
Na´isiu´nta Tomhalto ´irı´”.
85Section 40.Sch. 3
86[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Short Title, Number Provision affected Amendment
and Year
(1) (2) (3)
(b) in paragraph 1 of the
English text—
(i) in subparagraph (1), delete
“Office of the Director ofConsumer Affairs”, and
(ii) in subparagraph (2), insert
“National ConsumerAgency”.
Veterinary Practice Section 16(1) Substitute the following forAct 2005 (No. 22 of paragraph ( g):
2005)
“(g) one person who is
nominated for suchappointment by the NationalConsumer Agency;”.
PART 2
References in Certain Instruments to Director of Consumer
Affairs or Office of the Director of Consumer Affairs
Citation, Number and Provision affected Amendment
Year
(1) (2) (3)
Air Quality Standards Schedule 14 Substitute the following forRegulations 2002 (S.I. paragraph (6):No. 271 of 2002)
“(6) National Consumer
Agency”.
Genetically Modified Regulation 62(1) ( a) Substitute the following
Organisms (Deliberate for paragraph ( g):
Release) Regulations
“(g) the National Consumer 2003 (S.I. No. 500 of
Agency,”. 2003)
(b) In paragraph ( j),
substitute “the NationalConsumer Agency” for “theOffice of the Director ofConsumer Affairs”.
Ozone in Ambient Air Schedule 10 Substitute the following forRegulations 2004 (S.I. paragraph (6):No. 53 of 2004)
“(6) National Consumer
Agency”.
Investor Regulation 2 Substitute the following forCompensation Act paragraph ( b):
1998 (Section 18(4))
“(b) the National Consumer (Prescription of
Agency;”. Bodies and
Individuals)Regulations 2004 (S.I.No. 570 of 2004)
Finance Act 1993 Schedule Substitute “National(Section 60) Consumer Agency” forRegulations 2005 (S.I. “Office of the Director ofNo. 846 of 2005) Consumer Affairs”.[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 4
Enactments for the purpose of section 73(Undertakings with
the Agency)
Number and Year Short Title or Citation
(1) (2)
No. 16 of 1980 Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act 1980
No. 17 of 1995 Package Holidays and Travel Trade Act 1995
S.I. No. 224 of 1989 European Communities (Cancellation of Contracts
Negotiated away from Business Premises) Regulations1989
S.I. No. 27 of 1995 European Communities (Unfair Terms in ConsumerS.I. No. 307 of 2000 Contracts) Regulations 1995 and 2000
S.I. No. 204 of 1997 European Communities (Contracts for Time Sharing of
Immovable Property – Protection of Purchasers)Regulations 1997
S.I. No. 144 of 2000 European Communities (Contracts for Time Sharing of
Immovable Property – Protection of Purchasers)(Amendment) Regulations 2000
S.I. No. 207 of 2001 European Communities (Protection of Consumers in
Respect of Contracts Made by Means of DistanceCommunication) Regulations 2001
S.I. No. 639 of 2002 European Communities (Requirements to Indicate
Product Prices) Regulations 2002
S.I. No. 11 of 2003 European Communities (Sale of Consumer Goods and
Associated Guarantees) Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 68 of 2003 European Communities (Directive 2000/31/EC)
Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 490 of 2004 European Communities (Amendment of S.I. No. 68 of
2003) Regulations 2004
SCHEDULE 5
Enactments for the purpose of section 75(Compliance notices)
Number and Year Short Title or Citation
(1) (2)
No. 16 of 1980 Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Act 1980
No. 17 of 1995 Package Holidays and Travel Trade Act 1995
S.I. No. 168 of 1984 Consumer Information (Advertisements) (Disclosure of
Business Interest) Order 1984
S.I. No. 224 of 1989 European Communities (Cancellation of Contracts
Negotiated away from Business Premises) Regulations1989
S.I. No. 103 of 1997 Consumer Information (Advertisements for Concert or
Theatre Performances) Order 1997
S.I. No. 204 of 1997 European Communities (Contracts for Time Sharing of
Immovable Property – Protection of Purchasers)Regulations 1997
S. I. No. 144 of 2000 European Communities (Contracts for Time Sharing of
Immovable Property – Protection of Purchasers)(Amendment) Regulations 2000
S.I. No. 468 of 2000 Consumer Information (Advertisements for Airfares)
Order 2000
87Section 73 .
Section 75 .Sch. 5
Section 87 .
88[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
Number and Year Short Title or Citation
(1) (2)
S.I. No. 207 of 2001 European Communities (Protection of Consumers in
Respect of Contracts made by Means of DistanceCommunication) Regulations 2001
S.I. No. 68 of 2003 European Communities (Directive 2000/31/EC)
Regulations 2003
S.I. No. 490 of 2004 European Communities (Amendment of S.I. No. 68 of
2003) Regulations 2003
SCHEDULE 6
Redress for contravention of section 87
1. In this Schedule—
“Act of 1994” means the Terms of Employment (Information)
Act 1994;
“employee” and “employer” have the same meaning as they have
in the Act of 1994.
2. (1) An employee may present a complaint to a rights com-
missioner that the employer has contravened section 87(3) in relation
to the employee and, if the employee does so, the commissioner shallgive the parties an opportunity to be heard by the commissioner andto present to the commissioner any evidence relevant to the com-plaint, shall give a decision in writing in relation to it and shall com-municate the decision to the parties.
(2) A decision of a rights commissioner under subparagraph (1)
shall do one or more of the following:
(a) declare that the complaint was or, as the case may be, was
not well founded;
(b) require the employer to comply with section 87(3) and, for
that purpose, require the employer to take specifiedsteps;
(c) require the employer to pay to the employee compen-
sation of such amount (if any) as is just and equitablehaving regard to all the circumstances, but not exceeding104 weeks remuneration in respect of the employee’semployment calculated in accordance with regulationsunder section 17 of the Unfair Dismissals Act 1977;
and the references in the foregoing clauses to an employer shall be
construed, in a case where ownership of the business of the employerchanges after the contravention to which the complaint relatesoccurred, as references to the person who, by virtue of the change,becomes entitled to such ownership.
3. For the purposes of this Schedule—
(a) subsections (3) to (6) and subsection (7)( a) of section 7 of
the Act of 1994 shall apply in relation to a complaintpresented under this Schedule as they apply in relation[2007.] [ No. 19.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
to a complaint presented under subsection (1) of that
section 7, with the following modifications, namely:
(i) the deletion in that subsection (3) of all the words
from “if it is presented” to the end of that subsectionand the substitution of “unless it is presented to himwithin the period of 12 months beginning on the dateof the contravention to which the complaint relatesor (in a case where the rights commissioner is satis-fied that exceptional circumstances prevented thepresentation of the complaint within the periodaforesaid) such further period, not exceeding 6months from the expiration of the said period of 12months, as the rights commissioner considersreasonable”;
(ii) the substitution in that subsection (6) of a reference
to a decision for the reference to a recommendation;
and any other necessary modifications,
(b) sections 8 to 10 of the Act of 1994 shall apply as they
apply for the purposes of that Act, with the followingmodifications, namely:
(i) the substitution in those provisions of references to a
decision for references to a recommendation;
(ii) the addition to section 8 of the following subsection:
“(7) Proceedings under this section before the Tri-
bunal shall be heard otherwise than in public.”;
(iii) the substitution in section 9 of—
(I) references to the Circuit Court for references to
the District Court, and
(II) the following subsection for subsection (3):
“(3) An application under this section to
the Circuit Court shall be made to the judgeof the Circuit Court for the circuit in whichthe employer concerned ordinarily resides orcarries on any profession, trade orbusiness.”;
and any other necessary modifications.
4. (1) In proceedings under this Schedule before a rights com-
missioner or the Employment Appeals Tribunal in relation to a com-plaint that section 87(3) has been contravened, it shall be presumed,
until the contrary is proved, that the employee concerned actedreasonably and in good faith in forming the opinion and making thecommunication concerned.
(2) If a penalisation of an employee, in contravention of section
87(3) , constitutes a dismissal of the employee within the meaning of
the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005, relief may not be grantedto the employee in respect of that penalisation both under thisSchedule and under those Acts.
89Sch. 6Section 101 and 102 .
Section 102 .
90[No. 19.] [2007.] Consumer Protection Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 7
Statutory Instruments for the purposes of sections 101and 102
(Directions respecting product safety and admissibility of
laboratory tests)
Number and Year Citation
S.I. No. 32 of 1990 European Communities (Safety of
Toys) Regulations 1990
S.I. No. 101 of 1992 European Communities (Appliances
Burning Gaseous Fuels) Regulations1992
S.I. No. 482 of 1992 European Communities (Low Voltage
Electrical Equipment) Regulations1992
S.I. No. 272 of 1993 European Communities (Personal
Protective Equipment) Regulations1993
S.I. No. 199 of 2004 European Communities (General
Product Safety) Regulations 2004
SCHEDULE 8
Directives for the purpose of section 102(Admissibility of
laboratory tests)
Council Directive 73/23/EEC of 19 February 1973 on the harmoniz-
ation of the laws of Member States relating to electrical equipmentdesigned for use within certain voltage limits
Council Directive 88/378/EEC of 3 May 1988 on the approximation
of the laws of the Member States concerning the safety of toys
Council Directive 89/686/EEC of 21 December 1989 on the approxi-
mation of the laws of the Member States relating to personal protec-tive equipment
Council Directive 90/396/EEC of 29 June 1990 on the approximation
of the laws of the Member States relating to appliances burning gase-ous fuels
Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 3 December 2001 on the approximation of the laws of the MemberStates relating to general product safety.