————————
Number 18of2009
————————
BROADCASTING ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General matters
Section
1. Short title.
2. Definitions.3. Repeals.4. Expenses.
PART 2
Broadcasting Authority of Ireland
5. Establishment day.
6. Establishment of Authority, Contract Awards and Com-
pliance Committees.
7. Body corporate and seal.8. Appointment of Authority, Contract Awards Committee and
Compliance Committee.
9. Criteria for membership.
10. Terms and removal.11. Chairperson of Authority or statutory committee.12. Exclusions from membership of Authority or statutory
committee.
13. Meetings of Authority or statutory committee.14. Chief executive officer of Authority.15. Staff.
12[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
16. Superannuation.
17. Advisory committees.18. Consultants and advisers.19. Accountability of chief executive to Committee of Public
Accounts.
20. Accountability of chief executive and chairpersons of Auth-
ority and statutory committees to other OireachtasCommittees.
21. Disclosure by members of Authority and statutory commit-
tee of certain interests.
22. Disclosure by staff of Authority of certain interests.23. Code of conduct.24. Independence.25. Objectives of Authority.26. Functions of Authority.27. Functions of Contract Awards Committee.28. Functions of Compliance Committee.29. Strategy statements.30. Policy communications.31. Powers.32. Duties of Authority and statutory committees.33. Levy.34. Exchequer funding.35. Borrowings.
36. Deposits and charges for services.37. Accounts and audits.38. Reports to Minister.
PART 3
Broadcasters —Duties, Codes and Rules
39. Duties of broadcasters.40. Recording of broadcasts.41. Advertising.42. Broadcasting codes.
43. Broadcasting rules.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
44. Inspection of draft broadcasting codes and rules.
45. Presentation of broadcasting codes and rules to Minister.46. Co-operation with other parties — standards and self-
regulation.
PART 4
Redress
47. Code of practice — complaints handling.48. Complaints process.49. Right of reply.
PART 5
Enforcement
Chapter 1
Compliance with terms of contract
50. Investigation into affairs of contractor.51. Termination or suspension of contract under Part 6 or8.
Chapter 2
Financial Sanctions
52. Definitions ( Chapter 2 ).
53. Investigation into affairs of broadcaster.54. Report, findings, recommendations and procedures relating
to outcome of investigation.
55. Financial sanctions.56. Matters to be considered in determining the amount of finan-
cial sanction.
Chapter 3
Notifications
57. Notifications.
PART 6
Broadcasting Contracts and Content Provision Contracts —
Commercial and Community Broadcasters
58. Interpretation ( Part 6 ).
59. Broadcasting licence.
60. Variation of broadcasting licence.61. Emergencies.62. Restriction on award of sound broadcasting contract.
34[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
63. Sound broadcasting contracts.
64. Community sound broadcasting contracts.65. Applications for sound broadcasting contracts.66. Determination of applications for award of sound broadcast-
ing contracts and television programme servicecontract.
67. Fast-track application process for award of sound broadcast-
ing contracts.
68. Sound broadcasting contracts for temporary or institutional
sound broadcasting services.
69. Terms and conditions of broadcasting contract.70. Television programme service contract.71. Content provision contracts.72. Community content provision contracts.73. Assessment of community needs in respect of broadcasting.74. Electronic programme guides.75. Rules with respect to programme guide contracts.76. Transmission of broadcasting services by MMD system.77. Must-carry and must-offer obligations.78. Offences ( Part 6 ).
PART 7
Public Service Broadcasting
Chapter 1
Public Service Broadcasting Corporations —Common Provisions
79. Bodies corporate.80. Seals of corporations.81. Appointment of board.82. Criteria for board membership.
83. Appointment of staff member.84. Terms and removal.85. Chairperson.86. Exclusions from board membership.87. Duties of board members.88. Meetings.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
89. Director general.
90. Staff.91. Superannuation.92. Accountability of director general and chairperson to
Oireachtas Committees.
93. Disclosure by members of corporation of certain interests.94. Disclosure by staff and contractors for services of certain
interests.
95. Code of conduct.96. Audience council.97. Advisory committees.98. Independence.99. Statement of strategy.
100. Sectoral impact assessments by Authority.
101. Public service statement.102. Annual statement of performance commitments.103. Ministerial consent for new services and variations in
channels.
104. Establishment of subsidiaries and joint ventures.105. Duty of corporation with respect to its revenue.106. Advertisements.107. Borrowings.108. Transactions between public service and commercial oppor-
tunities.
109. Accounts and audit.110. Reports and information.111. Access to archives.112. Code of fair trading practice.
Chapter 2
Provisions specific to RTE ´
113. Raidio ´Teilifı ´sE´ireann.
114. Principal objects and associated powers of RTE ´.
115. Broadcasting infrastructure.116. Independent programme account.
56[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Chapter 3
Provisions specific to TG4
117. Continuance of Teilifı ´s na Gaeilge.
118. Principal objects and associated powers of TG4.119. Accountability of director general of TG4 to Committee of
Public Accounts.
Chapter 4
Exchange of Programme Material and Spectrum Licencing
120. Duty to supply programme material.121. Public service broadcasting licence.
122. Emergencies.
Chapter 5
Allocation of Public Funding to RTE ´and TG4
123. Allocation of public funding.124. Recommendations as to changes to public funding.
Chapter 6
Bealach Thithe an Oireachtais and Bealach Scanna ´nn ah E ´ireann
125. Bealach Thithe an Oireachtais (Houses of the Oireachtas
Channel).
126. Amendment of Schedule to Houses of the Oireachtas Com-
mission Act 2003.
127. Bealach Scanna ´nn ah E ´ireann (Irish Film Channel).
128. Oversight of public funding of Houses of the Oireachtas
Channel and Irish Film Channel.
PART 8
Digital Broadcasting and Analogue Switch-Off
129. Definitions ( Part 8 ).
130. Additional functions of RTE ´.
131. Additional functions of Authority.132. Duty of Communications Regulator in respect of digital ter-
restrial television multiplexes.
133. Duty of Communications Regulator in respect of digital ter-
restrial sound broadcasting multiplexes.
134. Amendment of sound broadcasting contracts for listed simul-
cast services.
135. Regulations prescribing fees.136. Applications for multiplex contracts.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
137. Determination of applications for award of multiplex
contracts.
138. Terms and conditions of multiplex contracts.139. Analogue switch-off.
PART 9
Television Licence
140. Definitions ( Part 9 ) — order — “specified place”.
141. Laying regulations and orders — Part 9 .
142. Restrictions on possession of television set.143. Grant of television licences.144. Regulations in regard to television licences.145. Issue of television licences by agent.146. Request to show television licence.147. Statutory declaration.148. Offences for not having television licence.149. Reminder notification and fixed payment notice.150. Reminder notification — effective date of television licence
and recovery of licence fees.
151. Prosecution of offences.152. Miscellaneous amendments.
PART 10
Broadcasting Fund
153. Definitions ( Part 10 ).
154. Broadcasting funding scheme.155. Objectives of scheme.156. Amounts to be paid by Minister to scheme.157. Broadcasting fund.158. Reviews of scheme.159. Winding-up and dissolution of scheme.
PART 11
Major Events Television Coverage
160. Definitions ( Part 11 ).
161. Application.
78[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
162. Designation of major events.
163. Consultation.164. Broadcasters’ duties with respect to designated events.165. Broadcasters’ duties with respect to Member State events.166. Civil remedies.167. Reasonable market rates.168. Qualifying broadcaster may apply to High Court to obtain
rights from event organiser to provide coverage of des-ignated event on free television services in State, etc.
169. Arbitration in respect of reasonable market rates where
event organiser is willing to sell broadcasting rights todesignated event to qualifying broadcaster.
170. Criteria for determining reasonable market rates.171. Obligation to give copy of agreement or arrangement to
broadcasting rights to Minister.
172. Service of directions and notification.173. Review of designated events.
PART 12
Transitional Provisions
174. Dissolution of BCI and saver.175. Dissolution of BCC and saver.176. Transitional provisions — BCI.177. Transitional provisions — BCC.
178. Final accounts of BCI.179. Continuance of Ministerial consents given in respect of
public service broadcasters.
PART 13
Wireless Telegraphy
180. Collective citations — Wireless Telegraphy Acts.181. Amendment of Broadcasting and Wireless Telegraphy Acts
(increase of fines, etc.).
182. Matters relating to wireless telegraphy.
PART 14
Miscellaneous
183. Amendment to definitions in Copyright and Related Rights
Act 2000.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
184. Minister’s functions in relation to electronic communications
networks and electronic communications services.
185. Amendment of section 5 of Act of 1998 (advertisement, etc.,
by Referendum Commission).
SCHEDULE 1
Enactments Repealed
SCHEDULE 2
Sections 5to9of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1926
————————
910[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
British-Irish Agreement Act 1999 1999, No. 1
Broadcasting (Amendment) Act 2007 2007, No. 15Broadcasting (Funding) Act 2003 2003, No. 43Broadcasting (Major Events Television Coverage)
(Amendment) Act 2003 2003, No. 13
Broadcasting (Major Events Television Coverage) Act
1999 1999, No. 28
Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1968 1968, No. 35Broadcasting (Offences) Acts 1968 and 1988Broadcasting Act 1990 1990, No. 24Broadcasting Act 2001 2001, No. 4Broadcasting and Wireless Telegraphy Act 1988 1988, No. 19Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1964 1964, No. 4Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1966 1966, No. 7Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1971 1971, No. 2Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1973 1973, No. 1Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1974 1974, No. 33Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1976 1976, No. 37Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1979 1979, No. 36Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 15Broadcasting Authority Act 1960 1960, No. 10Communications Regulation Act 2002 2002, No. 20Communications Regulation (Amendment) Act 2007 2007, No. 22Companies Act 1963 1963, No. 33Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 8Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000 2000, No. 28Disability Act 2005 2005, No. 14Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 1995, No. 22European Communities (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 25European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2Houses of the Oireachtas Commission Act 2003 2003, No. 28Intoxicating Liquor Act 2003 2003, No. 31Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Maritime Safety Act 2005 2005, No. 11Mercantile Marine Act 1955 1955, No. 29Police (Property) Act 1897 60 & 61 Vic. c. 30.Postal and Telecommunications Services Act 1983 1983, No. 24Prohibition of Incitement to Hatred Act 1989 1989, No. 19Radio and Television Act 1988 1988, No. 20Referendum Act 1998 1998, No. 1Registration of Clubs (Ireland) Act 1904 4 Edw. 7, c. 9Road Traffic Act 1961 1961, No. 24Wireless Telegraphy Act 1926 1926, No. 45Wireless Telegraphy Act 1972 1972, No. 5Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1926 to 1988Wireless Telegraph Act 1956 1956, No. 4————————
Number 18of2009
————————
BROADCASTING ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO REVISE THE LAW RELATING TO BROAD-
CASTING SERVICES AND CONTENT AND FOR THATPURPOSE TO ESTABLISH AN AUTHORITY TO BE
KNOWN AS, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, THEBROADCASTING AUTHORITY OF IRELAND OR, INTHE IRISH LANGUAGE, U ´DARA ´S CRAOLACHA ´IN NA
hE´IREANN, TO DISSOLVE THE BROADCASTING COM-
MISSION OF IRELAND AND THE BROADCASTINGCOMPLAINTS COMMISSION, TO AMEND AND REPEALCERTAIN ENACTMENTS RELATING TO BROADCAST-ING, TO PROVIDE FOR MATTERS RELATING TOTELEVISION LICENCES, TO PROVIDE FOR THE REGU-LATION AND PROVISION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONSSERVICES AND TO PROVIDE FOR CONNECTEDMATTERS.
[12th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General matters
1.—This Act may be cited as the Broadcasting Act 2009.
2.—In this Act—
“Act of 1926” means Wireless Telegraphy Act 1926;
“Act of 1972” means Wireless Telegraphy Act 1972;“Act of 1988” means Broadcasting and Wireless Telegraphy Act
1988;
“Act of 1998” means Referendum Act 1998;“Act of 2001” means Broadcasting Act 2001;“Authority” means Broadcasting Authority of Ireland;“BCC” means Broadcasting Complaints Commission;
11Short title.
Definitions.Pt.1 S.2
12[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“BCI” means Broadcasting Commission of Ireland;
“broadcast” means the transmission, relaying or distribution by elec-
tronic communications network of communications, sounds, signs,visual images or signals, intended for direct reception by the generalpublic whether such communications, sounds, signs, visual images orsignals are actually received or not;
“broadcaster” means a person who supplies a compilation of prog-
ramme material for the purpose of its being transmitted, relayed ordistributed as a broadcasting service (whether that person transmits,relays or distributes that material as such a service or not);
“broadcasting code” means a code prepared under section 42 ;
“broadcasting contract” means a contract entered into under section
63,64,68or70;
“broadcasting contractor” means a person holding a broadcasting
contract;
“broadcasting rules” means rules prepared under section 43 ;
“broadcasting service” means a service which comprises a compi-
lation of programme material of any description and which is trans-mitted, relayed or distributed by means of an electronic communi-cations network, directly or indirectly for simultaneous or near-simultaneous reception by the general public, whether that materialis actually received or not, and where the programmes are providedin a pre-scheduled and linear order, but does not include:
(a) a service provided in a non-linear manner where each user
of the service chooses a programme from a catalogue ofprogrammes, or
(b) other audio and audiovisual services provided by way of
the Internet;
“children” means persons under the age of 18 years;“Communications Regulator” means Commission for Communi-
cations Regulation;
“communications media” means—
(a) the provision of a broadcasting service,
(b) the provision of a broadcasting services platform, or
(c) the publication of newspapers or periodicals consisting
substantially of news and comment on current affairs;
“community broadcaster” means a person holding a contract under
sections 64 ,68(1)(b) or72;
“community of interest” means a group of persons with a shared
interest, association or bond;
“Compliance Committee” means the committee of the Authority
established to undertake the functions set out in section 28 ;
“content provision contract” has the meaning assigned to it in
section 71 ;
“Contract Awards Committee” means the committee of the Auth-
ority established to undertake the functions set out in section 27;[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“corporation” means RTE ´or TG4 or both, as the case may be;
“Council Directive” means Council Directive 89/552/EEC of 3
October 19891on the co-ordination of certain provisions laid down
by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States con-cerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities as amendedby Directive 97/36/EC of the European Parliament and of theCouncil of 30 June 1997
2and by Directive 2007/65/EC of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 20073;
“director general” means a person appointed as the director general
of a corporation under section 89(1) ;
“electronic communications network” means transmission systems
including, where applicable—
(a) switching equipment,
(b) routing equipment, or
(c) other resources,
which permit the conveyance of signals by wire, by radio, by optical
or by other electromagnetic means, and such conveyance includesthe use of—
(i) satellite networks,
(ii) electricity cable systems, to the extent that they are used
for the purposes of transmitting signals,
(iii) fixed terrestrial networks (both circuit-switched and
packet-switched, including the Internet),
(iv) mobile terrestrial networks,
(v) networks used for either or both sound and television
broadcasting, and
(vi) cable television and internet protocol television networks,
irrespective of the type of information conveyed;
“EEA Agreement” has the meaning assigned to it in the European
Communities (Amendment) Act 1993;
“electronic programme guide” has the meaning assigned to it by
section 74 ;
“electronic programme guide contract” has the meaning assigned to
it by section 74 ;
“employment” includes—
(a) full-time employment,
(b) part-time paid employment, where such employment is
ongoing in the year of appointment or which arises insubsequent years,
1OJ No. L. 298/23, 17.10.1989
2OJ No. L. 202/60, 30.07.1997
3OJ No. L. 332, 18.12.2007
13Pt.1 S.2Pt.1 S.2
14[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(c) temporary paid employment, being for a period of 16
weeks or more in the year of appointment or in sub-sequent years, or
(d) being retained under contract, directly or indirectly, in any
capacity as an adviser, consultant or lobbyist, or for theprovision of services, by or in any business related to thefunctions of the public body concerned;
“establishment day” means the day appointed by the Minister under
section 5 to be the establishment day for the purposes of Part 2 ,
sections 49 ,157and Part 12 ;
“excepted person” means a person who is under the jurisdiction of
another Member State and, for the purposes of this definition, theCouncil Directive applies for the purpose of determining the stateunder the jurisdiction of which the person falls;
“exploitation of commercial opportunities object” means an activity
undertaken by a corporation in pursuance of paragraph (j) ofsection
114(1) orparagraph (i) ofsection 118(1) ;
“free-to-air service” means a broadcasting service for the reception
of which no charge is made by the person providing the service;
“holder” means—
(a) in relation to a contract entered into under this Act, the
person with whom the Authority has entered into thecontract,
(b) in relation to a licence granted under this Act or any other
enactment, the person to whom the licence has beengranted;
“holding company” has the same meaning as in the Companies Act
1963;
“interests” includes—
(a) employment by or on behalf of—
(i) any business related to the functions of the public
body concerned,
(ii) any organisation representative of any business
related to the functions of the public bodyconcerned,
(b) ownership of any business related to the functions of the
public body concerned,
(c) shares in, bonds or debentures of, or other like invest-
ments in any business related to the functions of thepublic body concerned, where the aggregate of such hold-ings exceeds \13,000,
(d) a directorship or shadow directorship (within the meaning
of the Companies Acts) in any business related to thefunctions of the public body concerned, held currently orduring the previous two years, or
(e) gifts of travel, holidays, transport or other benefits (in
excess of \650), including benefits from any beneficial[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
interest in or connected with any business related to the
functions of the public body concerned, during the pre-vious two years which were received by the person con-cerned or by his or her spouse;
“Joint Oireachtas Committee” means a Joint Committee of the
Houses of the Oireachtas to which those Houses have assigned therole of examining matters relating to broadcasting;
“local community” means the community of a town or other urban
or rural area;
“media literacy” means to bring about a better public understand-
ing of:
(a) the nature and characteristics of material published by
means of broadcast and related electronic media,
(b) the processes by which such material is selected, or made
available, for publication by broadcast and related elec-tronic media,
(c) the processes by which individuals and communities can
create and publish audio or audio-visual material bymeans of broadcast and related electronic media, and
(d) the available systems by which access to material pub-
lished by means of broadcast and related electronicmedia is or can be regulated;
“Member State” includes a state that is a contracting state to the
EEA Agreement;
“Minister” means Minister for Communications, Energy and
Natural Resources;
“MMD system” means a multipoint microwave distribution system
used for the transmission of broadcasting services on a point to multi-point basis;
“multiplex” has the meaning assigned to it by section 129 ;
“multiplex contractor” means the holder of a contract entered into
under section 131 ;
“multiplex licence” has the meaning assigned to it by section 129 ;
“national emergency” means an emergency declared under section
10 of the Act of 1926;
“ownership” includes any proprietary interest in any business related
to the functions of the public body concerned, whether that interestis freehold, leasehold or beneficial, and applies where the interest—
(a) is held solely by the person concerned or shared with one
or more persons, and
(b) has a value of \5,000 or more;
“programme material” means audio-visual material or audio
material and includes advertisements and material which, whentransmitted, will constitute a direct offer to the public for the sale orsupply to them of goods or other property (whether real or personal)or services;
15Pt.1 S.2Pt.1 S.2
16[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“provide a broadcasting service” means to supply a compilation of
programme material for the purpose of its being transmitted, relayedor distributed as a broadcasting service;
“public service broadcaster” means RTE ´, TG4, the Houses of the
Oireachtas Channel and the Irish Film Channel;
“public service broadcasting licence” means a licence issued under
section 121 ;
“public service objects” shall mean an activity undertaken by a cor-
poration in pursuance of paragraphs (a) to(i)ofsection 114(1) or
paragraphs (a) to(h)ofsection 118(1) ;
“Raidio ´Teilifı ´sE´ireann” means the authority established under
section 3 of the Broadcasting Authority Act 1960;
“RTE ´” means Raidio ´Teilifı ´sE´ireann;
“sectoral” means pertaining to the provision of broadcasting and
broadcasting related services;
“sound broadcasting service” means a broadcasting service which
transmits, relays or distributes, by wireless telegraphy, communi-cations, sounds, signs or signals intended for direct reception by thegeneral public whether such communications, sounds, signs or signalsare actually received or not;
“statutory committee” means the Contract Awards Committee or
the Compliance Committee or both, as the case may be;
“subscription or pay-per-view basis”, in relation to the making avail-
able of a broadcasting service, means any basis for making a chargeon a person in respect of the reception by him or her of a broadcast-ing service, and includes the basis of making such a charge by refer-ence to the number of items of programme material viewed by himor her;
“subsidiary” has the same meaning as in the Companies Act 1963;“superannuation benefits” means pensions, gratuities or other allow-
ances payable on resignation, retirement or death;
“Teilifı ´s na Gaeilge” means the body established by section 44 of the
Act of 2001;
“TG4” means Teilifı ´s na Gaeilge;
“television programme service” means a service which comprises a
compilation of audio-visual programme material of any descriptionand is transmitted, distributed or relayed by means of wireless tel-egraphy directly or indirectly for reception by the general public;
“television programme service contract” and “television programme
service contractor” have the same meaning as they have in section 70 ;
“television licence fees” means a fee paid on a licence granted under
section 143 in respect of a television set (within the meaning of
section 140 );
“terrestrial means”, in relation to the transmission of a broadcasting
service, means any means of transmitting such a service by wirelesstelegraphy, other than by means of a MMD system or a satellitedevice and “digital terrestrial means” shall be read accordingly;[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“transmission” includes, in the case of a MMD system, distribution
and “transmit” and “re-transmit” shall be read accordingly;
“website” means a website maintained on the Internet;“wireless telegraphy” has the same meaning as in the Act of 1926.
3.—The enactments mentioned in Schedule 1 are repealed to the
extent specified in the third column ofSchedule 1 .
4.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of monies provided by the Oireachtas.
PART 2
Broadcasting Authority of Ireland
5.—The Minister may by order appoint a day to be the establish-
ment day for the purposes of this Part, sections 49 ,157and Part 12 .
6.—There stands established, on the establishment day—
(a) a body to be known as, in the English language, the Broad-
casting Authority of Ireland, or in the Irish language,U´dara´s Craolacha ´in na hE ´ireann, to perform the func-
tions conferred on it by this Act, and
(b) two committees of the Authority to be known as the Con-
tract Awards Committee and the Compliance Commit-tee, to perform the functions conferred on those commit-tees by this Act.
7.—(1) The Authority shall be a body corporate, with perpetual
succession and the power to sue and be sued and to acquire, holdand dispose of land and other property.
(2) The Authority shall, as soon as may be after its establishment,
provide itself with a seal.
(3) The seal of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signa-
ture of—
(a) the chairperson of the Authority or another member of
the Authority, or
(b) a member of the staff of the Authority,
authorised by the Authority to act in that behalf.
(4) Judicial notice shall be taken of the seal of the Authority and
every document purporting to be an instrument made by the Auth-ority and to be sealed with the seal of the Authority shall be receivedin evidence and be deemed to be such instrument without furtherproof unless the contrary is shown.
(5) Any contract or instrument which, if entered into or executed
by a person not being a body corporate, would not require to be
17Pt.1 S.2
Repeals.
Expenses.
Establishment day.
Establishment of
Authority, ContractAwards andComplianceCommittees.
Body corporate and
seal.Pt.2 S.7
Appointment of
Authority, ContractAwards Committeeand ComplianceCommittee.
18[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
under seal may be entered into or executed on behalf of the Auth-
ority by any person generally or specially authorised by the Auth-ority in that behalf.
(6) The Contract Awards Committee and Compliance Committee
shall perform their functions under the seal of the Authority.
8.—(1) The members of the Authority shall be 9 in number, of
which—
(a) 5 of them shall be appointed by the Government on the
nomination of the Minister, and
(b) subject to subsection (2) , 4 of them shall be appointed by
the Government on the nomination of the Minister.
(2) Where an appointment is to be made by the Government
under subsection (1)(b) or under that paragraph arising from a vac-
ancy referred to in section 10(11) —
(a) the Minister shall inform the Joint Oireachtas Committee
of the proposed appointment,
(b) the Minister in respect of an appointment under subsection
(1)(a) shall provide a statement to the Joint Oireachtas
Committee indicating the relevant experience and expert-ise of the persons or person nominated by the Ministerfor appointment or appointed by the Government on thenomination of the Minister, and such other matters as theMinister considers relevant,
(c) the Joint Oireachtas Committee shall within the period of
90 days of being so informed, advise the Minister of thenames of the persons or name of the person it proposesthat the Minister should nominate under subsection
(1)(b) giving reasons, such as relevant experience and
expertise, in relation to the proposed named persons orperson,
(d) the Minister shall have regard to the advice and may
accept the proposed named persons or some of them orthe named person or decide to nominate as he or she seesfit other persons or another person, and
(e) inform the Joint Oireachtas Committee of his or her
decision.
(3) Not less than 4 of the members of the Authority shall be men
and not less than 4 of them shall be women.
(4) The members of the Contract Awards Committee shall be 8
in number, of which—
(a) 4 shall be appointed by the Government on the nomi-
nation of the Minister, and
(b) 4 shall be appointed by the Authority, being 2 of the
members, and 2 of the members of staff, of the Authority.
(5) The Government and the Authority shall, insofar as is practi-
cable, endeavour to ensure that among the members of the Contract[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Awards Committee there is an equal balance between men and
women.
(6) The members of the Compliance Committee shall be 8 in
number, of which—
(a) 4 shall be appointed by the Government on the nomi-
nation of the Minister, and
(b) 4 shall be appointed by the Authority, being 2 of the
members, and 2 of the members of staff, of the Authority.
(7) The Government and the Authority shall, insofar as is practi-
cable, endeavour to ensure that among the members of the Com-pliance Committee there is an equal balance between men andwomen.
(8) The Joint Oireachtas Committee for the purposes of providing
advice to the Minister under subsection (2) may establish a panel, for
such duration, and consisting of such number of persons as the JointOireachtas Committee thinks proper.
(9) Persons placed on a panel established under subsection (8)
shall have experience of or have shown capacity in one or more ofthe areas stated in section 9(1) and shall be chosen with a view to
representing the public interest in respect of broadcasting matters.
(10) The Joint Oireachtas Committee shall, insofar as is practi-
cable, endeavour to ensure that among the persons placed on a panelunder subsection (8) there is an equal balance between men and
women.
(11) The Joint Oireachtas Committee shall have sole responsi-
bility for the selection and placing of candidates on a panel estab-lished under subsection (8) .
9.—(1) A person shall not be appointed by the Government to be
a member of the Authority or a statutory committee unless he orshe has had experience of or shown capacity in one or more of thefollowing areas—
(a) media affairs,
(b) public service broadcasting, commercial broadcasting or
community broadcasting,
(c) broadcast content production,
(d) digital media technologies,
(e) trade union affairs,
(f) business or commercial affairs,
(g) matters pertaining to the development of the Irish
language,
(h) matters pertaining to disability,
(i) arts, music, sport or culture,
(j) science, technology or environmental matters,
19Pt.2 S.8
Criteria for
membership.Pt.2 S.9
Terms and removal.
20[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(k) legal or regulatory affairs, and
(l) social, educational or community affairs or Gaeltacht
affairs.
(2) Each member of the Authority and a statutory committee
shall be appointed for a period not exceeding 5 years and shall rep-resent the public interest in respect of broadcasting matters.
(3) The Government and the Authority in setting a term of
appointment under subsection (2) shall consider the need for conti-
nuity of membership of the Authority and a statutory committee.
(4) A member of the Authority or a statutory committee whose
term of office expires by the effluxion of time is eligible for re-appointment.
(5) A member of the Authority or a statutory committee shall not
serve more than 2 consecutive terms of office.
(6) A member of the Authority or a statutory committee
appointed by the Government may at any time resign his or heroffice by letter addressed to the Government and the resignationshall take effect on the date specified therein or upon receipt of theletter by the Government, whichever is the later.
(7) A member of the Authority or a member of staff of the Auth-
ority who is appointed by the Authority to serve on a statutory com-mittee may at any time resign his or her position on such committeeby letter addressed to the chairperson of the Authority and the resig-nation shall take effect on the date specified therein or upon receiptof the letter by the chairperson of the Authority, whichever is thelater.
10.—(1) There shall be paid to the members of the Authority and
a statutory committee appointed by the Government, out of moneyat the disposal of the Authority such remuneration (if any) as theMinister, with the consent of the Minister for Finance, from time totime determines.
(2) There shall be paid to the members of the Authority and a
statutory committee, out of money at the disposal of the Authority,such allowances for expenses incurred by them in the performanceof their functions as the Minister, with the consent of the Ministerfor Finance, from time to time determines.
(3) Subject to this Part, a member of the Authority or a statutory
committee shall hold office on such terms (other than the paymentof remuneration and allowances for expenses) as the Minister deter-mines at the time of his or her appointment.
(4) The Minister shall cause a statement in writing specifying the
expertise or experience, terms of office and remuneration of themembers of the Authority and a statutory committee to be laidbefore both Houses of the Oireachtas and published in the Iris
Oifigiu ´il.
(5) A member of the Authority or a statutory committee may at
any time be removed from membership of the Authority or the statu-tory committee, as the case may be, by the Government if, in theGovernment’s opinion, the member has become incapable throughill-health of performing his or her functions, or has committed stated[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
misbehaviour, or his or her removal appears to the Government to
be necessary for the effective performance by the Authority or thestatutory committee, as the case may be, of its functions, and only if,resolutions are passed by each House of the Oireachtas calling forhis or her removal.
(6) A member of the Authority or a statutory committee shall
cease to be and shall be disqualified from being a member of theAuthority, or the statutory committee where such member—
(a) is adjudicated a bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with creditors,
(c) on conviction on indictment by a court of competent juris-
diction is sentenced to a term of imprisonment,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty, or
(e) is disqualified or restricted from being a director of any
company.
(7) A member of staff of the Authority who is appointed by the
Authority to serve on a statutory committee shall cease to be amember of the committee on the cessation of his or her contract ofservice with the Authority.
(8) Where a member of the Authority or a statutory committee
fails—
(a) for a consecutive period of 6 months, to attend a meeting
of the Authority or the statutory committee, as the casemay be, unless the member demonstrates to the Mini-ster’s satisfaction that the failure to attend was due toillness,
(b) to comply with the requirements of section 21 ,o r
(c) to make a declaration in accordance with the requirements
of section 17 of the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995,
the Minister may, with the consent of the Government, by order
remove the member from membership of the Authority or the statu-tory committee, as the case may be.
(9) ( a) An order made under subsection (8) shall be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable afterit is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which an order was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph (a) , pass a resolution annul-
ling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of an order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
(10) If a member (other than a member referred to in subsection
(11)) of the Authority, or a statutory committee appointed by the
Government on the nomination of the Minister dies, resigns,becomes disqualified or is removed from office or for any other
21Pt.2 S.10Pt.2 S.10
Chairperson of
Authority orstatutorycommittee.
22[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
reason ceases to be a member of the Authority, or the statutory
committee, as the case may be, the Government on the nominationof the Minister, may appoint a person to be a member of the Auth-ority or a statutory committee to fill the casual vacancy so occasionedand the person so appointed shall be appointed for the unexpiredperiod of the term of membership of, and in the same manner as,the member of the Authority or the statutory committee, as the casemay be, appointed by the Government on the nomination of theMinister who occasioned the casual vacancy.
(11) If a member of the Authority appointed by the Government
on the nomination of the Minister under paragraph (b) ofsection
8(1), dies, resigns, becomes disqualified or is removed from office or
for any other reason ceases to be a member of the Authority, theGovernment on the nomination of the Minister, the Minister havingregard to the advice of the Joint Oireachtas Committee, may appointa person to be a member of the Authority to fill the casual vacancyso occasioned and the person so appointed shall be appointed forthe unexpired period of the term of membership of, and in the samemanner as, the member of the Authority appointed by the Govern-ment on the nomination of the Minister under paragraph (b) of
section 8(1) who occasioned the casual vacancy.
(12) If a member of a statutory committee appointed by the Auth-
ority dies, resigns, becomes disqualified or is removed from office orfor any other reason ceases to be a member of the committee, theAuthority may appoint one of its members or a member of staff ofthe Authority to be a member of the committee to fill the casualvacancy so occasioned and the person so appointed shall beappointed for the unexpired period of the term of membership of,and in the same manner as, the member of the committee appointedby the Authority who occasioned the casual vacancy.
11.—(1) The Government shall from time to time as occasion
requires appoint, on the nomination of the Minister—
(a) a member of the Authority to be the chairperson of it,
(b) a member of the Contract Awards Committee appointed
by the Government under section 8(4)(a) to be chair-
person of it, and
(c) a member of the Compliance Committee appointed by the
Government under section 8(6)(a) to be chairperson of it.
(2) A chairperson shall, unless he or she sooner dies, resigns the
office of chairperson or ceases to be chairperson under subsection
(4), hold office until the expiration of his or her period of office
as a member of the Authority or statutory committee, as the casemay be.
(3) A chairperson may at any time resign his or her office as chair-
person by letter sent to the Government and the resignation shall,unless it is previously withdrawn in writing, take effect at the com-mencement of the meeting of the Authority or statutory committee,as the case may be, held next after the body has been informed bythe Government of the resignation.
(4) Where a chairperson ceases during his or her term of office as
chairperson to be a member of the Authority or statutory committee,as the case may be, he or she shall also cease to be chairperson ofthe body.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(5) In this section “chairperson” means chairperson of the Auth-
ority or a statutory committee, as the case may be.
12.—(1) Where a member of the Authority or a statutory commit-
tee is nominated as a candidate for election to the European Parlia-ment, or to either House of the Oireachtas, he or she shall thereuponstand suspended from membership of the Authority or the statutorycommittee, as the case may be, and shall not be entitled to participatein meetings of the Authority or the statutory committee or receivefrom the Authority any remuneration or allowances in respect of theperiod commencing on such nomination and ending when such per-son is so regarded as not having been elected as the case may be.
(2) Where a member of the Authority or a statutory committee
is—
(a) nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) elected as a member of either House of the Oireachtas or
the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to Part XIII of the Second Schedule to
the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 as havingbeen elected to that Parliament to fill a vacancy,
he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member of the Authority or
the statutory committee, as the case may be.
(3) Where the person who is the chief executive officer or a
member of the staff of the Authority is—
(a) nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) nominated as a candidate for election to either House of
the Oireachtas or the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to Part XIII of the Second Schedule to
the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 as havingbeen elected to that Parliament to fill a vacancy,
he or she shall thereupon stand seconded from employment by the
Authority and shall not be paid by, or be entitled to receive from, theAuthority any remuneration or allowances in respect of the periodcommencing on such nomination or election, or when he or she is soregarded as having been elected as the case may be, and ending whensuch person ceases to be a member of either such House or thatParliament.
(4) A person who is for the time being entitled under the Standing
Orders of either House of the Oireachtas to sit therein or who is amember of the European Parliament, shall, while so entitled or sucha member, be disqualified from becoming a member of the Authority
or a statutory committee or the chief executive officer or a memberof the staff of the Authority.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (3) , that sub-
section shall be read as prohibiting, inter alia , the reckoning of a
period mentioned in that subsection as service with the Authorityfor the purposes of any superannuation benefits.
23Pt.2 S.11
Exclusions from
membership ofAuthority orstatutorycommittee.Pt.2 S.12
Meetings of
Authority orstatutorycommittee.
24[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(6) A person who holds employment or an interest in a broadcast-
ing undertaking, including but not limited to a public service broad-caster, or an undertaking holding a contract under this Act shall bedisqualified from becoming or ceases to be a member of the Auth-ority or a statutory committee.
(7) A person who holds an interest in an undertaking which pub-
lishes a newspaper in the State shall be disqualified from becomingor ceases to be a member of the Authority or a statutory committee.
(8) A person who holds membership of the Contract Awards
Committee shall be disqualified from becoming or ceases to be amember of the Compliance Committee.
(9) A person who holds membership of the Compliance Commit-
tee shall be disqualified from becoming or ceases to be a member ofthe Contract Awards Committee.
13.—(1) The Authority and a statutory committee shall hold such
and so many meetings as may be necessary for the due performanceof their functions.
(2) The Minister may fix the date, time and place of the first meet-
ing of the Authority and a statutory committee.
(3) Subject to this Part, the Authority and a statutory committee
shall regulate their procedure and practice by rules made under thissection.
(4) Any rules made under this section shall be published on a
website on the Internet to be maintained by the Authority.
(5) At a meeting of the Authority or a statutory committee—
(a) the chairperson of the Authority or the committee, as the
case may be, shall, if present, be chairperson of the meet-ing, and
(b) if and so long as the chairperson is not present or the office
of chairperson is vacant, the members of the Authorityor the committee, as the case may be, who are presentshall choose one of their number to be the chairpersonof the meeting.
(6) At a meeting of the Authority or a statutory committee, each
member of the Authority or the committee, as the case may be,present, including the chairperson, shall have a vote and any questionon which a vote is required in order to establish the Authority’s orcommittee’s view shall be determined by a majority of the votes ofthe members of the Authority or statutory committee, as the casemay be, present when the vote is called and voting on the question
and, in the case of an equal division of votes, the chairperson of themeeting shall have a second and casting vote.
(7) The quorum for a meeting of the Authority shall be 5.(8) The quorum for a meeting of the Contract Awards Committee
shall be 5 of which 2 shall be members appointed by the Governmentunder section 8(4)(a) .[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(9) The quorum for a meeting of the Compliance Committee shall
be 5 of which 2 shall be members appointed by the Governmentunder section 8(6)(a) .
(10) The Authority or a statutory committee may act notwith-
standing one or more vacancies among its members.
(11) Subject to any rule made under subsection (3) , meetings of
the Authority or a statutory committee shall be capable of beingheld by telephone or other suitable electronic means whereby all themembers of the Authority or the relevant statutory committee canhear and be heard.
14.—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Authority
(“chief executive”).
(2) The chief executive shall perform his or her functions subject
to such policies as may be determined from time to time by the Auth-ority and shall be accountable to the Authority for the efficient andeffective management of the administration of the Authority, Con-tract Awards Committee and Compliance Committee and for thedue performance of his or her functions.
(3) The chief executive may delegate his or her functions to a
member of staff of the Authority, subject to such conditions as thechief executive considers appropriate, unless they are delegated tothe chief executive subject to the condition that they shall not be sub-delegated, and the member of staff concerned shall be accountable tothe chief executive for the performance of the functions so delegatedto him or her.
(4) Notwithstanding any delegation under subsection (3) the chief
executive shall at all times remain accountable to the Authority forthe performance of the functions so delegated.
(5) The chief executive of the Authority shall hold office for such
period and on such terms and conditions (including terms and con-ditions relating to remuneration and allowances for expenses) as maybe determined by the Authority, with the consent of the Ministerand the Minister for Finance.
(6) The chief executive shall be appointed, by means of a public
competition, by the Authority with the consent of the Minister.
(7) The Minister may appoint the chief executive of the BCI to
be the interim chief executive of the Authority.
(8) Subject to subsection (10) , the interim chief executive of the
Authority shall hold office for such period (which period shall not inany case exceed one year after the establishment of the Authority)and on such terms and conditions (including terms and conditionsrelating to remuneration and allowances for expenses) as may bedetermined by the Minister.
(9) Where an interim chief executive appointed under subsection
(7)ceases to hold office for any reason (other than under subsection
(10)) before the expiration of the period of his or her appointment,
the Minister may appoint a person who shall be known as the interimchief executive who shall hold office for such period (which periodshall not in any case exceed the remainder of the term of office ofthe person who occasioned the vacancy he or she is appointed to fill)and on such terms and conditions (including terms and conditions
25Pt.2 S.13
Chief executive
officer of Authority.Pt.2 S.14
Staff.
26[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
relating to remuneration and allowances for expenses) as may be
determined by the Minister.
(10) When a chief executive is appointed under subsection (6) or
(12) the interim chief executive of the Authority shall cease to hold
office.
(11) Until the appointment to the Authority of a chief executive
under subsection (6) or(12), the interim chief executive of the Auth-
ority shall perform all of the functions of a chief executive underthis Act.
(12) Notwithstanding subsection (6) the Authority may with the
consent of the Minister appoint, without selection by means of apublic competition, a person who immediately before the establish-ment day, was chief executive of the BCI, to be the first chief execu-tive of the Authority.
(13) The chief executive shall not hold any other office or employ-
ment or carry on any other business without the consent of theAuthority.
(14) The chief executive shall furnish the Authority with such
information (including financial information) in relation to the per-formance of his or her functions as the Authority may from time totime require.
(15) The functions of the chief executive may be performed in his
or her absence or when the position of chief executive is vacant bysuch member of the staff of the Authority as may, from time to time,be designated for that purpose by the Authority.
(16) The chief executive may be removed from office by the
Authority with the consent of the Minister for stated reasons.
15.—(1) The Authority shall, as well as appointing the chief
executive, appoint such and so many other persons to be membersof the staff of the Authority as the Authority from time to timethinks proper, subject to the prior consent of the Minister and theMinister for Finance.
(2) A person shall not be appointed under this section to be a
member of the staff of the Authority unless he or she has been selec-ted by means of a public competition.
(3) The requirement under subsection (2) of being selected by
means of a public competition does not apply in relation to:
(a) a person who, immediately before the establishment day,
was a member of staff of the BCI,
(b) an appointment consisting of the promotion of a person
who is already a member of staff of the Authority,
(c) an office for which, in the opinion of the Authority,
specialised qualifications not commonly held arerequired, or
(d) an office to which appointments are made for limited
periods only, being periods not exceeding 2 years.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(4) A member of staff of the Authority shall hold his or her office
or employment on such terms and conditions as the Authority fromtime to time determines, subject to the consent of the Minister andthe Minister for Finance.
(5) The Authority may perform any of its functions through or
by any of its members of staff duly authorised by the Authority inthat behalf.
(6) The Authority shall accept into its employment, on the estab-
lishment day in accordance with this section, every person whoimmediately before the establishment day is a member of staff ofthe BCI.
(7) Save in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated
with any recognised trade union or staff association concerned, amember of staff of the BCI who is transferred on the establishmentday to the Authority shall not, while in the service of the Authority,receive a lesser scale of pay or be subject to less beneficial conditionsof service than the scale of pay to which he or she was entitled andthe conditions of service to which he or she was subject immediatelybefore the establishment day.
(8) Until such time as the scales of pay and conditions of service
of members of staff so transferred are varied by the Authority, fol-lowing consultation with recognised trade unions or staff associ-ations, the scales of pay to which they were entitled and the con-ditions of service, restrictions, requirements and obligations to whichthey were subject before their transfer shall continue to apply tothem and may be exercised or imposed by the Authority or the chiefexecutive, of the Authority as the case may be, while they are in itsservice. As provided in subsection (7) , no such variation shall operate
to worsen the scales of pay and conditions of service applicable tosuch members of staff immediately before the establishment day,save in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated with anyrecognised trade union or staff association concerned.
(9) The conditions in regard to tenure of office which are granted
by the Authority in relation to a member of staff so transferred shallnot, while he or she is in the service of the Authority, be less favour-able to him or her than those prevailing on establishment day in theBCI. Any alteration in the conditions in regard to tenure of office ofany such member shall not be less favourable to him or her than the
prevailing conditions in the BCI at the time of such alteration, savein accordance with a collective agreement negotiated with any recog-nised trade union or staff association concerned. If a dispute arisesbetween the Authority and any such member of staff as to conditionsprevailing in the BCI on the establishment day, the matter shall bedetermined by the Minister for Finance.
16.—(1) As soon as may be after the establishment day, the Auth-
ority, with the consent of the Minister and the consent of the Mini-ster for Finance, shall make a scheme or schemes for the granting ofsuperannuation benefits to or in respect of the members of staff,including the chief executive, of the Authority.
(2) A superannuation scheme shall fix the time and conditions of
retirement of all persons to or in respect of whom superannuationbenefits are payable under the scheme or schemes and differenttimes and conditions may be fixed in respect of different classes ofpersons.
27Pt.2 S.15
Superannuation.Pt.2 S.16
Advisory
committees.
28[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) The Authority may, with the consent of the Minister and the
consent of the Minister for Finance, make a scheme amending orrevoking a superannuation scheme including a scheme under thissubsection.
(4) A superannuation scheme submitted by the Authority shall, if
approved by the Minister with the consent of the Minister for Fin-ance, be carried out by the Authority in accordance with its terms.
(5) Each superannuation scheme shall include a provision for
appeals from a decision relating to a superannuation benefit underthe scheme.
(6) No superannuation benefits shall be granted by the Authority
to or in respect of a person on ceasing to be chief executive or amember of the staff of the Authority otherwise than—
(a) in accordance with a superannuation scheme or schemes,
or
(b) with the consent of the Minister and the Minister for
Finance.
(7) Every superannuation scheme shall provide for not less
favourable conditions in respect of persons who, immediately beforeestablishment day, were members of staff of the BCI than those towhich they were entitled immediately before establishment day.
(8) Disbursement of superannuation benefits which may be
granted to or in respect of persons who, immediately before theestablishment day, were members of staff of the BCI shall not be onless favourable conditions than would apply if the benefits referredto had continued to be paid out of monies provided by the BCI.
(9) Where a superannuation benefit falls due for payment to or
in respect of a person to whom subsection (7) applies in the period
beginning on the establishment day and ending immediately beforethe coming into operation of a scheme submitted by the Authorityand approved of under this section, the allowance shall be calculatedand paid by the Authority in accordance with such superannuationarrangements or such enactments in relation to superannuation, asapplied to such person immediately before the establishment dayand, for that purpose, his or her pensionable service with the Auth-ority shall be aggregated with his or her previous pensionable service.
(10) ( a) A superannuation scheme shall be laid before each House
of the Oireachtas by the Minister as soon as may be afterit is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a schemewas laid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) , annul
the scheme.
(c) The annulment of a scheme under paragraph (b) takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done underthe scheme before the passing of the resolution.
17.—(1) The Authority may establish advisory committees to
advise and assist it or a statutory committee in the performance ofits functions.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) Where advisory committees include members other than
members of the Authority or a statutory committee or staff of theAuthority, such members may be paid such remuneration (if any)and allowances for expenses as the Authority considers reasonable,subject to the consent of the Minister and the Minister for Finance.
(3) The Authority may regulate the procedure of its advisory
committees, but subject to such regulation, an advisory committeemay regulate its own procedure.
(4) The Authority or a statutory committee and the chief execu-
tive shall have regard to, but shall not be bound by, the advice ofany advisory committee under this section.
18.—(1) The Authority may from time to time engage such con-
sultants or advisers as it or a statutory committee may considernecessary for the performance of the functions of the Authority or astatutory committee, and any fees due to a consultant or adviserengaged under this section shall be paid by the Authority out ofmonies at its disposal.
(2) The Authority or a statutory committee and the chief execu-
tive shall have regard to, but shall not be bound by, the advice ofany consultant or adviser under this section.
19.—(1) The chief executive shall, whenever he or she is required
to do so by a Committee of Da ´il E´ireann established under the
Standing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann to examine and report to Da ´il
E´ireann on the appropriation accounts and the reports of the
Comptroller and Auditor General, give evidence to that Committeeon—
(a) the regularity and propriety of the transactions recorded
or required to be recorded in any book or other record ofaccount subject to audit by the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral which the Authority is required by or under stat-ute to prepare,
(b) the economy and efficiency of the Authority in the use of
its resources,
(c) the systems, procedures and practices employed by the
Authority for the purpose of evaluating the effectivenessof its operations,
(d) any matter affecting the Authority referred to in a special
report of the Comptroller and Auditor General undersection 11(2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General(Amendment) Act 1993 or in any other report of theComptroller and Auditor General (in so far as it relatesto a matter specified in paragraph (a) ,(b)or(c)) that is
laid before Da ´il E´ireann, and
(e) all matters pertaining to the expenditure by the Authority
of monies received under section 34 .
(2) The chief executive, if required under subsection (1) to give
evidence, shall not question or express an opinion on the merits ofany policy of the Government or a Minister of the Government oron the merits of the objectives of such a policy.
29Pt.2 S.17
Consultants and
advisers.
Accountability of
chief executive toCommittee ofPublic Accounts.Pt.2
Accountability of
chief executive andchairpersons ofAuthority andstatutorycommittees to otherOireachtasCommittees.
30[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
20.—(1) In this section “Committee” means a Committee
appointed by either House of the Oireachtas or jointly by bothHouses of the Oireachtas (other than the Committee on Members’Interests of Da ´il E´ireann or the Committee on Members’ Interests
of Seanad E ´ireann) or a subcommittee of such a Committee.
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , the chief executive shall, at the
request in writing of a Committee, attend before it to give accountfor the general administration of the Authority and a statutorycommittee.
(3) Subject to subsection (4) , the chairperson of the Authority or
a statutory committee shall at the request in writing of a Committee,attend before it to represent the views of the Authority or a statu-tory committee.
(4) The chief executive or chairperson shall not be required to
give account before, or represent the views of the Authority or astatutory committee to, a Committee for any matter which is or hasbeen or may at a future time be the subject of proceedings before acourt or tribunal in the State.
(5) Where the chief executive or chairperson is of the opinion that
a matter in respect of which the chief executive or chairperson isrequested to give an account before, or represent the views of theAuthority or a statutory committee to, a Committee is a matter towhich subsection (4) applies, he or she shall inform the Committee
of that opinion and the reasons for the opinion and, unless the infor-mation is conveyed to the Committee at a time when the chief execu-tive or chairperson is before it, the information shall be so conveyedin writing.
(6) Where the chief executive or chairperson has informed a
Committee of his or her opinion in accordance with subsection (5)
and the Committee does not withdraw the request referred to insubsection (2) orsubsection (3) in so far as it relates to a matter the
subject of that opinion—
(a) the chief executive or chairperson may, not later than 21
days after being informed by the Committee of itsdecision not to do so, apply to the High Court in a sum-mary manner for determination of the question whetherthe matter is one to which subsection (4) applies, or
(b) the chairperson of the Committee may, on behalf of the
Committee, make such an application,
and the High Court may determine the matter.
(7) Pending the determination of an application under subsection
(6), the chief executive or chairperson shall not attend before the
Committee to give account for or represent the views of the Auth-ority or a statutory committee in respect of the matter the subject ofthe application.
(8) If the High Court determines that the matter concerned is one
to which subsection (4) applies, the Committee shall withdraw the
request referred to in subsection (2) orsubsection (3) , but if the High
Court determines that subsection (4) does not apply, the chief execu-
tive or chairperson shall attend before the Committee to giveaccount for or represent the views of the Authority or a statutorycommittee in respect of the matter.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
21.—(1) A member of the Authority or a statutory committee
who has—
(a) any interest in any body or concern with which the Auth-
ority has made a contract or proposes to make a con-tract, or
(b) any interest in any contract which the Authority has made
or proposes to make,
shall disclose to the Authority or the committee the fact of such
interest and the nature of it and shall not be present at any deliber-ation or decision of the Authority or the committee relating to thecontract.
(2) Where at a meeting of the Authority or a statutory committee,
any of the following matters arise, namely—
(a) an arrangement to which the Authority or the committee
is a party or a proposed such arrangement, or
(b) a contract or other agreement with the Authority or a pro-
posed such contract or other agreement,
then, any member of the Authority or a statutory committee present
at the meeting who otherwise than in his or her capacity as such amember has an interest in the matter shall—
(i) at the meeting disclose to the Authority or the committee
the fact of such interest and the nature of it,
(ii) neither influence nor seek to influence a decision to be
made in relation to the matter,
(iii) absent himself or herself from the meeting or that part of
the meeting during which the matter is discussed,
(iv) take no part in any deliberation of the Authority or the
committee relating to the matter, and
(v) not vote on a decision relating to the matter.
(3) Where an interest is disclosed under this section, the disclos-
ure shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting concerned and,for so long as the matter to which the disclosure relates is beingconsidered or discussed by the meeting, the member by whom thedisclosure is made shall not be counted in the quorum for themeeting.
(4) Where at a meeting of the Authority or a statutory committee
a question arises as to whether or not a course of conduct, if pursuedby a member of the Authority, or a statutory committee of the Auth-ority, would constitute a failure by him or her to comply with therequirements of subsections (1) or(2), the question may be deter-
mined by the Authority or the committee, whose decision shall befinal, and where such a question is so determined, particulars of thedetermination shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
(5) For the purposes of this section and section 22 a person shall
not be regarded as having an interest in any matter by reason onlyof an interest of that person, or of any company in which he or shehas an interest, which is so remote or insignificant that it cannotreasonably be regarded as likely to influence a person in considering,
31Pt.2
Disclosure by
members ofAuthority andstatutory committeeof certain interests.Pt.2 S.21
Disclosure by staff
of Authority ofcertain interests.
Code of conduct.
Independence.
32[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
discussing or in voting on, any question relating to the matter, or in
performing any function in relation to that matter.
22.—(1) Where a member of the staff of the Authority or a con-
sultant or adviser engaged under section 18 , in a category specified
before engagement by the Authority, has an interest, otherwise thanin his or her capacity as such, in any contract, or any proposed con-tract to which the Authority is or is proposed to be a party, or in anyagreement or arrangement or proposed agreement or arrangementto which the Authority or a statutory committee is or is proposed tobe a party, that person—
(a) shall disclose to the Authority his or her interest and the
nature of it,
(b) shall take no part in the negotiation of the contract, agree-
ment or arrangement or in any deliberation by membersof the Authority or the committee or members of thestaff of the Authority in relation to it,
(c) shall not influence or seek to influence a decision to be
made in the matter, and
(d) shall not make any recommendation in relation to the con-
tract, agreement or arrangement.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person as regards a contract
or proposed contract of employment of that person as a member ofthe staff of the Authority.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person as regards a contract
or proposed contract for services in respect of that person.
(4) In this section “member of staff” includes the chief executive
officer.
(5) Where a person to whom subsection (1) applies fails to comply
with a requirement of this section, the Authority shall decide theappropriate action (including removal from office or termination ofcontract) to be taken.
23.—(1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, draw up and
adopt a code of conduct in respect of controls on interests and ethicalbehaviour to apply to each member of the Authority, a statutorycommittee, an advisory committee and each member of the staff ofthe Authority.
(2) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, draw up a code of
conduct in respect of controls on interests and ethical behaviour toapply to such categories of contractors for services as the Authoritymay specify before engagement.
(3) The Authority shall publish on a website maintained by the
Authority any code of conduct drawn up under subsections (1) and
(2).
24.—Subject to this Act, the Authority and each statutory commit-
tee shall be independent in the performance of their functions.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
25.—(1) The Authority and the statutory committees, in per-
forming their functions, shall endeavour to ensure—
(a) that the number and categories of broadcasting services
made available in the State by virtue of this Act bestserve the needs of the people of the island of Ireland,bearing in mind their languages and traditions and theirreligious, ethical and cultural diversity,
(b) that the democratic values enshrined in the Constitution,
especially those relating to rightful liberty of expression,are upheld, and
(c) the provision of open and pluralistic broadcasting services.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Authority, and the statutory committees, shall—
(a) stimulate the provision of high quality, diverse and innov-
ative programming by commercial, community and publicservice broadcasters and independent producers,
(b) facilitate public service broadcasters in the fulfilment of
their public service objects as set out in this Act,
(c) promote diversity in control of the more influential com-
mercial and community broadcasting services,
(d) provide a regulatory environment that will sustain inde-
pendent and impartial journalism,
(e) provide a regulatory environment that will sustain com-
pliance with applicable employment law,
(f) protect the interests of children taking into account the
vulnerability of children and childhood to undue com-mercial exploitation,
(g) provide a regulatory environment that will facilitate the
development of a broadcasting sector in Ireland that isresponsive to audience needs and in particular is access-ible to people with disabilities, and
(h) promote and stimulate the development of Irish language
programming and broadcasting services.
(3) The Authority and the statutory committees, in performing
their functions, shall seek to ensure that measures taken—
(a) are proportionate having regard to the objectives set out
in this section,
(b) are applied across the range of broadcasting services tak-
ing account of the degree of influence that the differenttypes of broadcasting services are able to exert in shapingaudience views in the State,
(c) are mindful of the objects, functions and duties set for
public service broadcasters in Parts 7 and 8,
(d) will produce regulatory arrangements that are stable and
predictable, and
33Pt.2
Objectives of
Authority.Pt.2 S.25
Functions of
Authority.
34[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(e) will readily accommodate and encourage technological
development, and its application, by the broadcastingsector.
26.—(1) The principal functions of the Authority are to—
(a) prepare a strategy for the provision of broadcasting
services in the State additional to those provided by RTE ´,
TG4, the Houses of the Oireachtas Channel and the IrishFilm Channel,
(b) prepare a statement under section 29(1) ,
(c) liaise and consult with the Communications Regulator in
the preparation of the allocation plan for the frequencyrange dedicated to sound and television broadcasting,
(d) make a levy order under section 33(1) ,
(e) prepare or make broadcasting codes and rules,
(f) prepare a scheme for the exercise of the right of reply,
(g) direct the Contract Awards Committee to make arrange-
ments, in accordance with Parts 6 and 8, to invite, con-
sider and recommend to the Authority, and the Auth-ority shall follow such recommendation, proposals for theprovision of—
(i) broadcasting services additional to any broadcasting
services provided by RTE ´, TG4, the Houses of the
Oireachtas Channel and the Irish Film Channelunder Part 7 , and
(ii) multiplex services additional to any multiplex services
provided by RTE ´under Parts 7 and 8,
(h) prepare rules and enter into contracts in respect of elec-
tronic programme guides,
(i) determine disputes arising under section 76(2) and section
77(5),
(j) make a report to the Minister under section 77(15),
(k) consult with the Minister under sections 101(3) ,102(3) ,
103(4) ,104(1) ,(2)and (3),106(3) ,107(3) ,111(4) ,112(2) ,
(7)and (11),116(5) ,127(6) ,130(1) and 130(12) ,
(l) prepare and issue guidance to RTE ´and TG4 as to the
fulfilment of their obligations under sections 109(11)
and 112(2) ,
(m) undertake a review under section 124(2) and (8) and
section 128(3) ,
(n) make a recommendation under section 124(5) and (12),
(o) make a request under section 115 ,section 130(10) ,section
132(3) orsection 133(3) or(4),[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(p) make a report to the Minister under section 139(1) in
respect of preparedness for analogue switch-off,
(q) provide information to the public on the availability of
services by means of television multiplexes, and
(r) prepare and implement schemes for the granting of funds
under Part 10.
(2) The Authority has the following ancillary functions—
(a) to collect and disseminate information on the broadcasting
sector in the State,
(b) to monitor developments in broadcasting internationally,
(c) to initiate, organise, facilitate and promote research relat-
ing to broadcasting matters,
(d) to collect and disseminate information in relation to the
skills requirements of the broadcasting sector,
(e) to co-operate with other bodies, including representative
bodies within the broadcasting sector, to promote train-ing activities in areas of skill shortages in the broadcast-ing sector,
(f) to co-operate with other bodies outside the State which
perform similar functions to the Authority, and
(g) to undertake, encourage and foster research, measures and
activities which are directed towards the promotion ofmedia literacy, including co-operation with broadcasters,educationalists and other relevant persons.
(3) In fulfilling its function under subsection (1)(a) the Authority
shall consider the needs of community broadcasters in respect ofdigital broadcasting.
(4) For the purposes of the independent discharge of their func-
tions and duties as set out in this Part, the Authority or a statutorycommittee may enter into agreements with one another.
(5) The Minister may confer on the Authority by order such other
additional functions in relation to broadcasting services as he or shemay from time to time consider necessary.
(6) ( a) An order made under subsection (5) shall be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable afterit is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which an order was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph (a) , pass a resolution annul-
ling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of an order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
35Pt.2 S.26Pt.2
Functions of
Contract AwardsCommittee.
Functions of
ComplianceCommittee.
36[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
27.—The principal functions of the Contract Awards Committee,
at the direction of the Authority, are to make arrangements inaccordance with Parts 6 and 8, to invite, consider and recommend to
the Authority, and the Authority shall follow such recommendation,proposals for the provision of—
(a) broadcasting services additional to any broadcasting
services provided by RTE ´, TG4, the Houses of the
Oireachtas Channel and the Irish Film Channel underPart 7, and
(b) multiplex services additional to any multiplex services pro-
vided by RTE ´under Parts 7 and 8.
28.—(1) The principal functions of the Compliance Committee
are to—
(a) monitor compliance by contractors with the terms and
conditions of any contract entered into by the Authorityon the recommendation of the Contract Awards Commit-tee under this Act,
(b) enforce the terms and conditions of any contract entered
into by the Authority on the recommendation of theContract Awards Committee under this Act,
(c) monitor compliance by—
(i) broadcasters with sections 39 ,40and 41,
(ii) RTE ´and TG4 with section 106(3) , and
(iii) the Irish Film Channel with section 127(6) ,
(d) enforce compliance by—
(i) broadcasters with sections 39 ,40and 41,
(ii) RTE ´and TG4 with section 106(3) , and
(iii) the Irish Film Channel with section 127(6),
(e) monitor compliance by broadcasters with any broadcasting
code or rule,
(f) enforce compliance by broadcasters with any broadcasting
code or rule,
(g) investigate and decide upon a complaint made under
section 48 , and
(h) investigate and decide upon a request made under
section 49 .
(2) The Compliance Committee has the following additional
functions—
(a) at the request of the Minister, to report on compliance
by a corporation under s ections 108(3) ,109(13) ,111(11) ,
and 112(10),[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) at the request of the Minister, to report on the proportion
of the television programme service of a broadcasterwhich is—
(i) produced in the State or in another Member State,
and
(ii) devoted to original programme material produced
therein by persons other than the broadcaster, his orher subsidiary, his or her parent or existing broad-casting organisations.
(3) The Compliance Committee may delegate some of its func-
tions to a member of staff of the Authority, who is not a member ofthe Compliance Committee, subject to such conditions as the Com-pliance Committee considers appropriate and the member of staffconcerned shall be accountable to the Compliance Committee forthe performance of the functions so delegated to him or her.
(4) The Compliance Committee may delegate some of its func-
tions to a subcommittee of the Compliance Committee, subject tosuch conditions as the Compliance Committee considers appropriate.
(5) The Compliance Committee shall review on an ongoing basis
the extent to which the television broadcasts of broadcasters underthe jurisdiction of another Member State which are wholly or mainlydirected towards audiences in the State comply with broadcastingcodes, in particular the codes referred to in section 42(2)(g) and (h).
(6) The Compliance Committee shall each year make a report to
the Minister in respect of the matters in subsection (5) .
(7) The Minister shall cause a copy of the report referred to in
subsection (6) to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
29.—(1) The Authority shall draw up and adopt a statement of
strategy (“strategy statement”) reflecting the statutory functions ofthe Authority, the Contract Awards Committee and the Com-pliance Committee.
(2) A strategy statement shall—
(a) comprise the key objectives, outputs and related strategies,
including use of resources,
(b) be prepared in a form and manner in accordance with any
directions issued from time to time by the Minister,
(c) have regard to the need to ensure the most beneficial,
effective and efficient use of resources,
(d) except for the first strategy statement, include a review of
the efficiency and effectiveness of the statement duringthe preceding 3 year period,
(e) be adopted within 12 months of the establishment day and
every 3 years thereafter,
(f) consider any policy communication under section 30 , and
(g) include the Authority’s plans as to the number, nature and
scope of contracts that it proposes to enter into on the
37Pt.2 S.28
Strategy statements.Pt.2 S.29
Policy
communications.
Powers.
38[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
recommendation of the Contract Awards Committee
during the period covered by the statement.
(3) The Authority shall present a copy of the strategy statement
to the Minister and to such committees of either or both Houses ofthe Oireachtas as the Minister may, from time to time, direct.
(4) The Authority shall consult with the members of the Contract
Awards Committee and the Compliance Committee in drawing up astrategy statement under subsection (1) .
(5) Prior to the adoption of a strategy statement and its presen-
tation to the Minister, the Authority shall undertake a public consul-tation process on a draft of the strategy statement.
30.—(1) In the interests of the proper and effective regulation of
the broadcasting sector and the formulation of policy applicable tosuch proper and effective regulation, the Minister may issue suchpolicy communications to the Authority as he or she considersappropriate to be followed by the Authority in the performance ofits functions. The Authority in performing its functions, shall haveregard to any such communications.
(2) Before issuing a communication, the Minister shall give to the
Authority and publish a draft of the proposed communication and—
(a) give the reasons for it, and
(b) specify the period (being not less than 21 days from the
date of giving it to the Authority or such publication,whichever is the later) within which representations relat-ing to the proposal may be made by interested parties.
(3) The Minister, having considered any representations made
under subsection (2) , may issue the communication with or without
amendment.
(4) Where the Minister proposes to prepare a communication
which, in the opinion of the Minister, has or may relate to the func-tions of another Minister of the Government, the Minister shall notissue to the Authority or publish a draft of the proposal under sub-
section (2) without prior consultation with that other Minister of
the Government.
(5) The Minister shall not issue a communication in respect of the
performance of the functions of the Authority in respect of individ-ual undertakings or persons.
(6) The Minister shall not issue a communication under subsection
(1)in respect of the performance of the functions of the Contract
Awards Committee or the Compliance Committee.
(7) A communication shall be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas by the Minister as soon as may be after it is made.
(8) In this section “communication” means a policy communi-
cation under this section.
31.—(1) The Authority and a statutory committee shall have all
the powers necessary, incidental or conducive to their functions.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Authority shall have power necessary, incidental or conducive to itsfunctions—
(a) to make contracts, agreements and arrangements,
(b) to require contractors to enter into financial bonds with
the Authority on the recommendation of the ContractAwards Committee,
(c) to acquire and make use of copyrights, patents, licences,
privileges and concessions,
(d) to compile, prepare, publish and distribute, with or with-
out charge, printed, audio and audio-visual material,
(e) subject to the consent of the Minister, to arrange for the
provision of broadcasting and related services for and onbehalf of any Minister of the Government, and
(f) to undertake, sponsor or commission research.
(3) The Authority may invest any of its funds in any manner in
which a trustee is empowered by law to invest trust funds.
32.—(1) In this section “commercially sensitive information”
means—
(a) financial, commercial, technical or other information
whose disclosure could reasonably be expected to resultin a material financial loss or gain to the party to whichit relates, or could prejudice the competitive position ofthat party in the conduct of its business, or
(b) information whose disclosure could prejudice the conduct
or outcome of contractual or other negotiations of theparty to which it relates.
(2) It is the duty of the Authority to so conduct its affairs as to
secure that its revenue becomes as soon as possible, and thereaftercontinues to be, at least sufficient to meet its expenses.
(3) The Authority and its statutory committees shall have a duty
to keep the performance of their functions under review with a viewto securing that regulation by the Authority and its statutory commit-tees does not involve—
(a) the imposition of administrative burdens which are
unnecessary, or
(b) the maintenance of administrative burdens which have
become unnecessary.
(4) In reviewing its duty under subsection (3) the Authority and
its statutory committees shall, from time to time, publish a statementsetting out how they propose, during the period for which the state-ment is made, to ensure that regulation by the Authority and thestatutory committees does not involve the imposition or maintenanceof unnecessary administrative burdens.
39Pt.2 S.31
Duties of Authority
and statutorycommittees.Pt.2 S.32
Levy.
40[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(5) The first statement to be published under this section must be
published within a period of 2 years after the establishment day andshall be for a period of 3 years.
(6) A subsequent statement—
(a) must be published during the period to which the previous
statement related, and
(b) must be a statement for the period of 3 years beginning
with the end of the previous period.
(7) It is the duty of the Authority and the statutory committees
in performing their functions at times during a period for which astatement is in force under this section, to have regard to thatstatement.
(8) The Authority or a statutory committee may, if they think fit,
revise a statement under this section at any time before or duringthe period for which it is made.
(9) Where the Authority or a statutory committee revise a state-
ment, they must publish the revision as soon as practicable.
(10) The Authority shall not disclose commercially sensitive infor-
mation obtained from a corporation or the holder of a contract underPart 6 or8in pursuance of the Authority’s functions under this Act.
(11) The Authority is not contravening subsection (10) if the
disclosure—
(a) is made with the consent of the corporation or the holder
of a contract under Part 6 or8to which it relates, or
(b) is required by law.
33.—(1) For the purpose of meeting expenses properly incurred
by the Authority, the Contract Awards Committee and the Com-pliance Committee in the performance of their functions, the Auth-ority shall make an order imposing a levy on public service broad-casters and broadcasting contractors.
(2) Whenever a levy order is made there shall be paid to the
Authority by public service broadcasters and each broadcasting con-tractor such amount as shall be appropriate having regard to theterms of the levy order.
(3) The Authority may make separate levy orders for public
service, commercial and community broadcasters and for particularclasses of broadcasting contractors.
(4) A levy order shall provide for the collection, payment and
administration of a levy, including all or any of the following—
(a) the method of calculation of the levy,
(b) the times at which payment will be made and the form
of payment,
(c) the keeping, inspection and provision of records relating
to the levy, and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(d) any exemptions, deferrals or refunds of the levy.
(5) Any surplus of levy income over the expenses incurred by the
Authority in the discharge of its functions relevant to that levy in aparticular financial year shall either—
(a) be retained by the Authority to be offset against levy obli-
gations for the subsequent year, or
(b) be refunded proportionately to the providers of broadcast-
ing services on whom the levy is imposed.
(6) The Authority may recover as a simple contract debt in any
court of competent jurisdiction a levy from any person by whom itis payable.
(7) ( a) A levy order shall be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas by the Authority as soon as may be after itis made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a levy orderwas laid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) , pass
a resolution annulling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of a levy order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
(8) In this section “levy order” means an order imposing a levy
under subsection (1) .
34.—(1) Where in the opinion of the Minister an expense incurred
by the Authority in performing its functions is of an exceptional nat-ure, the Minister, after consultation with the Authority and with theconsent of the Minister for Finance, may from time to time pay tothe Authority such an amount as he or she determines to be reason-able for the purposes of defraying expenses incurred by the Auth-ority and its statutory committees in performing their functionsunder this Act.
(2) The Minister, with the approval of the Minister for Finance,
may pay to the Authority such amount as he or she considers reason-able in respect of the expenses of the Authority and its statutorycommittees for the one year period from the establishment day.
35.—(1) The Authority may, with the approval of the Minister,
given with the consent of the Minister for Finance, borrow tempor-arily such sums as it may require for the purpose of providing forcurrent expenditure.
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Minister, given
with the consent of the Minister for Finance, borrow money bymeans of the creation of stock or other forms of security to be issued,transferred, dealt with and redeemed in such manner and on suchterms and conditions as the Authority, with the consent of the Mini-ster for Finance, may determine.
(3) The borrowing powers conferred by subsection (2) on the
Authority may, subject to the consent of the Minister, be exercised
41Pt.2 S.33
Exchequer funding.
Borrowings.Pt.2 S.35
Deposits and
charges for services.
Accounts and
audits.
42[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
for any purpose arising in connection with the performance of its
functions, but there may be attached to a consent to borrow thecondition that the monies shall be utilised only for the purpose of aprogramme of capital works approved by the Minister.
(4) The terms upon which monies are borrowed under subsection
(2)may include provisions charging the monies and interest thereon
upon all property of whatsoever kind for the time being vested inthe Authority or upon any particular property of the Authority andprovisions establishing the priority of such charges amongstthemselves.
36.—(1) A deposit may be payable by a person, of such an
amount as the Contract Awards Committee considers reasonable, inrespect of an application made by the person to the Contract AwardsCommittee for the entry into, by the Authority, on the recommend-ation of the Contract Awards Committee, with the person, of abroadcasting contract.
(2) The Authority may make a charge for services or facilities
provided by it.
(3) Any surplus of income over the expenses incurred by the
Authority in respect of subsection (2) in a particular financial year
shall be applied in such manner as the Minister, after consultationwith the Authority and with the approval of the Minister for Finance,may direct, and any such direction may require that all, or part asmay be specified in the direction, of such excess be paid into theCentral Fund.
(4) The Authority may recover as a simple contract debt in any
court of competent jurisdiction from the person by whom it is pay-able any amount due and owing to it under this section.
37.—(1) The chief executive, following the agreement of the
Authority, shall not later than 30 September in each year, submitestimates of income and expenditure to the Minister in respect ofthe subsequent three financial years, in such form as may be requiredby the Minister, and shall furnish to the Minister any informationwhich the Minister may require in relation to such estimates, includ-ing proposals and future plans relating to the performance by theAuthority, the Contract Awards Committee and the ComplianceCommittee of their functions, as required.
(2) The chief executive, under the direction of the Authority, shall
cause to be kept, on a continuous basis, all proper books and recordsof account of all income and expenditure of the Authority, and ofthe sources of such income and the subject matter of such expendi-ture, and of the property, assets and liabilities of the Authority andshall keep and shall account to the Authority for all such specialaccounts required by Part 10 , and as the Authority, with the consent
of the Minister, or the Minister may from time to time direct shouldbe kept.
(3) ( a) The Authority, the chief executive and any relevant
member of the staff of the Authority shall, whenever sorequested by the Minister, permit any person appointedby the Minister to examine the books or other records ofaccount of the Authority in respect of any financial yearor other period and shall facilitate any such examination.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) In this subsection “relevant member of the staff of the
Authority” means a member of the staff of the Authorityin respect of whom there have been duly assigned dutieswhich relate to the books or other records of accountreferred to in paragraph (a) .
(4) The accounts of the Authority for each financial year shall be
kept in such a form and manner as may be specified by the Ministerwith the consent of the Minister for Finance and be prepared by thechief executive and approved by the Authority as soon as practicablebut not later than 3 months after the end of the financial year towhich they relate for submission to the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral for audit.
(5) A copy of the accounts referred to in subsection (4) and the
report of the Comptroller and Auditor General thereon shall,immediately after the audit of the Comptroller and Auditor General,be presented to the members of the Authority and to the Ministeras soon as may be but not later than 6 months after the end of thefinancial year to which they relate and the Minister shall cause a copyof these documents to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(6) The financial year of the Authority shall be the period of 12
months ending on 31 December in any year, and for the purposes ofthis section the period commencing on the establishment day andending on the following 31 December is deemed to be a financialyear.
(7) The Authority shall publish, with the consent of the Minister
and the Minister for Finance, on a website maintained by the Auth-ority, such estimates of income and expenditure as are required tobe prepared under subsection (1) or a summary of them.
38.—(1) The Authority shall, not later than 30 June in each year,
make a report to the Minister (in this section referred to as an“annual report”) in such form as the Minister may approve, on theperformance of its functions and on its activities, during the preced-ing year. The Minister shall cause copies of each annual report to belaid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(2) An annual report shall include details of any scheme approved
under Part 10 .
(3) An annual report shall include a report to the Minister by
each statutory committee in such form as the Minister may approve,on the performance of its functions and on its activities, during thepreceding year.
(4) An annual report shall include a report to the Minister on
progress made towards increasing accessibility of broadcastingservices to people with disabilities, and in particular, on progressmade to achieve the targets set out in any broadcasting rules.
(5) An annual report shall include a report to the Minister in
respect of contracts entered into by the Authority under section 67
and any consequent strategy the Authority proposes to adopt toencourage competition in respect of the award of sound broadcastingcontracts, excluding contracts entered into under sections 64 and 68.
(6) An annual report shall include a report to the Minister of the
attendance of members of the Authority and each statutory commit-tee at their meetings during the preceding year.
43Pt.2 S.37
Reports to Minister.Pt.2 S.38
Duties of
broadcasters.
44[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(7) An annual report shall include information in such form and
regarding such matters as the Minister may direct.
(8) The Authority and each statutory committee may, from time
to time, make such other reports to the Minister relating to theirfunctions as they think fit or as the Minister may require.
(9) In addition to information provided by the Authority in its
annual report and in any reports made under subsection (8) , the
Authority and each statutory committee shall supply to the Ministersuch information as the Minister may from time to time requireregarding the performance of their functions.
PART 3
Broadcasters —Duties, Codes and Rules
39.—(1) Every broadcaster shall ensure that—
(a) all news broadcast by the broadcaster is reported and
presented in an objective and impartial manner and with-out any expression of the broadcaster’s own views,
(b) the broadcast treatment of current affairs, including
matters which are either of public controversy or the sub-ject of current public debate, is fair to all interests con-cerned and that the broadcast matter is presented in anobjective and impartial manner and without anyexpression of his or her own views, except that should itprove impracticable in relation to a single broadcast toapply this paragraph, two or more related broadcasts maybe considered as a whole, if the broadcasts are trans-mitted within a reasonable period of each other,
(c) in the case of sound broadcasters a minimum of—
(i) not less than 20 per cent of the broadcasting time, and
(ii) if the broadcasting service is provided for more than
12 hours in any one day, two hours of broadcastingtime between 07.00 hours and 19.00 hours,
is devoted to the broadcasting of news and current affairs
programmes, unless a derogation from this requirementis authorised by the Authority under subsection (3) ,
(d) anything which may reasonably be regarded as causing
harm or offence, or as being likely to promote, or inciteto, crime or as tending to undermine the authority of theState, is not broadcast by the broadcaster, and
(e) in programmes broadcast by the broadcaster, and in the
means employed to make such programmes, the privacyof any individual is not unreasonably encroached upon.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1)(a) or(b)prevents a broadcaster
from transmitting party political broadcasts provided that a broad-caster does not, in the allocation of time for such broadcasts, give anunfair preference to any political party.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1)(c) , the Authority may author-
ise a derogation from the requirement in question in whole or in partin the case of a sound broadcasting service but only if it is satisfiedthat the authorisation of such a derogation would be beneficial tothe listeners of the sound broadcasting service.
(4) The sound broadcasting services established and maintained
by RTE ´are deemed to be one sound broadcasting service for the
purposes of subsection (1)(c) .
(5) A broadcaster shall ensure that the broadcast treatment of any
proposal, being a proposal concerning policy as regards broadcasting,which is of public controversy or the subject of current public debate,which is being considered by the Government or the Minister, shallbe reported and presented in an objective and impartial manner.
(6) Paragraphs (a) and (b)ofsubsection (1) , in so far as they
require the broadcaster not to express his or her own views, do notapply to any broadcast made under subsection (5) .
40.—(1) A broadcaster, by means of its own facilities and in a
manner approved of for the purposes of this section by the Com-pliance Committee, shall record every broadcast made by the broad-caster or every item of programme material supplied by him or herunder a broadcasting contract or a content provision contract.
(2) Recordings made in compliance with subsection (1) , shall be
retained by the broadcaster for such period as stands determined bythe Compliance Committee for the purposes of this section.
(3) When a complaint is being investigated by the Compliance
Committee under section 48 , the recording of a broadcast to which
the complaint relates, together with the recording, made and beingretained under this section, of any other broadcast which in theopinion of the Compliance Committee is relevant to that broadcast,shall be supplied by the broadcaster to the Compliance Committeeon a request made by the Compliance Committee at any time duringsuch period.
(4) The making or retaining of a recording in compliance with
subsection (1) is not a contravention of the Copyright and Related
Rights Act 2000.
41.—(1) A programme broadcast in a broadcasting service may
include advertisements inserted in it.
(2) The total daily times for broadcasting advertisements in a
sound broadcasting service must not exceed a maximum of 15 percent of the total daily broadcasting time and the maximum time tobe given to advertisements in any hour shall not exceed a maximumof 10 minutes.
(3) A broadcaster shall not broadcast an advertisement which is
directed towards a political end or which has any relation to anindustrial dispute.
(4) A broadcaster shall not broadcast an advertisement which
addresses the issue of the merits or otherwise of adhering to anyreligious faith or belief or of becoming a member of any religion orreligious organisation.
45Pt.3 S.39
Recording of
broadcasts.
Advertising.Pt.3 S.41
Broadcasting codes.
46[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(5) Nothing in subsection (3) is to be read as preventing the
broadcasting of a party political broadcast provided that a broad-caster does not, in the allocation of time for such broadcasts, give anunfair preference to any political party.
(6) Subsection (3) does not apply to advertisements broadcast at
the request of the Referendum Commission in relation to a matterreferred to in section 3 of the Act of 1998 concerning a referendum.
(7) In this section, references to advertisements shall be read as
including references to advertising matter contained in sponsoredprogrammes, that is to say, in programmes supplied for advertisingpurposes by or on behalf of an advertiser.
42.—(1) The Authority shall prepare, and from time to time as
occasion requires, revise, in accordance with this section, a code orcodes governing standards and practice (“broadcasting code”) to beobserved by broadcasters.
(2) Broadcasting codes shall provide—
(a) that all news broadcast by a broadcaster is reported and
presented in an objective and impartial manner and with-out any expression of the broadcaster’s own views,
(b) that the broadcast treatment of current affairs, including
matters which are either of public controversy or the sub-ject of current public debate, is fair to all interests con-cerned and that the broadcast matter is presented in anobjective and impartial manner and without anyexpression of the broadcaster’s own views,
(c) that anything being likely to promote, or incite to, crime,
or as tending to undermine the authority of the State, isnot broadcast by a broadcaster,
(d) that in programmes broadcast by a broadcaster, and in the
means employed to make such programmes, the privacyof any individual is not unreasonably encroached upon,
(e) that a broadcaster does not, in the allocation of time for
transmitting party political broadcasts, give an unfairpreference to any political party,
(f) that in respect of programme material broadcast by a
broadcaster that audiences are protected from harmful oroffensive material, in particular, that programme materialin respect of the portrayal of violence and sexual conduct,shall be presented by a broadcaster—
(i) with due sensitivity to the convictions or feelings of
the audience, and
(ii) with due regard to the impact of such programming
on the physical, mental or moral development ofchildren,
(g) that advertising, teleshopping material, sponsorship and
other forms of commercial promotion employed in anybroadcasting service, in particular advertising and othersuch activities which relate to matters likely to be ofdirect or indirect interest to children, protect the interests[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
of children having particular regard to the general public
health interests of children,
(h) that advertising, teleshopping material, sponsorship and
other forms of commercial promotion employed in anybroadcasting service, other than advertising and otheractivities as aforesaid falling within paragraph (g) , protect
the interests of the audience,
(i) that the provision of a broadcasting service which has, as
one of its principal objectives, the promotion of theinterests of any organisation, protects the interests of theaudience, and
(j) for the matters required to be provided for by Chapters
IIA, IV and V of the Council Directive.
(3) In preparing or revising a broadcasting code, the Authority
shall have regard to each of the following matters—
(a) the degree of harm or offence likely to be caused by the
inclusion of any particular sort of material in programmesgenerally, or in programmes of a particular description,
(b) the likely size and composition of the potential audience
for programmes included in television and sound broad-casting services generally, or in television and soundbroadcasting services of a particular description,
(c) the likely expectation of the audience as to the nature of
a programme’s content and the extent to which the nat-ure of a programme’s content can be brought to theattention of potential members of the audience,
(d) the likelihood of persons who are unaware of the nature
of a programme’s content being unintentionally exposed,by their own actions, to that content,
(e) the desirability of securing that the content of a broadcast-
ing service identifies when there is a change affecting thenature of the service that is being watched or listened toand, in particular, a change that is relevant to the appli-cation of the codes set under this section, and
(f) the desirability of maintaining the independence of edi-
torial control over programme content.
(4) A broadcasting code prepared by the Authority under subsec-
tion (2)(g) may prohibit the advertising in a broadcasting service of
a particular class or classes of foods and beverages considered by theAuthority to be the subject of public concern in respect of thegeneral public health interests of children, in particular those whichcontain fat, trans-fatty acids, salts or sugars.
(5) In preparing a broadcasting code under subsection (2)(g) the
Authority may consult with the relevant public health authorities.
(6) Whenever the Authority prepares or revises a broadcasting
code relating to the matter in question every broadcaster shall com-ply with such broadcasting code and any revision of it.
(7) A copy of any broadcasting code shall be presented to the
Minister as soon as may be after it is made.
47Pt.3 S.42Pt.3 S.42
Broadcasting rules.
48[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(8) In this section and section 43 “teleshopping material” means
material which, when transmitted, will constitute a direct offer to thepublic for the sale or supply to them of goods or other property(whether real or personal) or services.
(9) The following codes prepared under section 19 of the Act of
2001, namely—
(a) the Code of Programme Standards (10 April 2007),
(b) the Children’s Advertising Code (1 January 2005), and
(c) the Advertising Code (10 April 2007),
if in force on the passing of this Act, continue in force as if made
under the corresponding provision of this section and have effectaccordingly.
43.—(1) The Authority shall, subject to the requirements of
section 41(2) and, in accordance with subsection (4) , prepare, and
from time to time as occasion requires, revise rules (“broadcastingrules”) with respect to—
(a) the total daily times that shall be allowed for the trans-
mission of advertisements and teleshopping material ona broadcasting service, in respect of a contract underPart 6 ,
(b) the maximum period that shall be allowed in any given
hour for the transmission of advertisements and teleshop-ping material (within the meaning of section 42(8) )o n
such a broadcasting service, and the Authority may makedifferent such rules with respect to different classes ofbroadcasting service,
(c) the specific steps each broadcaster is required to take to
promote the understanding and enjoyment by—
(i) persons who are deaf or have a hearing impairment,
(ii) persons who are blind or partially sighted, and
(iii) persons who have a hearing impairment and are par-
tially sighted,
of programmes transmitted on any broadcasting service
provided by the broadcaster.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1)(c) ,
broadcasting rules with respect to that paragraph shall require eachbroadcaster of audio-visual material to take specified steps toprovide access to that material by persons who are deaf or have ahearing impairment, persons who are blind or partially sighted, andpersons who have a hearing impairment and are partially sighted bymeans of specified services such as—
(a) sign language,
(b) teletext services,
(c) subtitling, and audio description, and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(d) have regard to whether the foregoing material is being
provided—
(i) daily or at other regular intervals,
(ii) at popular viewing times as well as at other times, and
(iii) for news and news-related matters as well as for
other matters.
(3) Rules under subsection (1)(c) may, in respect of any period
specified in them beginning on or after the passing of this Act,require a broadcaster to ensure that a specified percentage of prog-rammes transmitted on a broadcasting service provided by him orher in that period employs specified means by which the understand-ing and enjoyment by persons referred to in subparagraphs (i), (ii)
and (iii) of that paragraph of that percentage of programmes may
be promoted.
(4) Broadcasting rules shall provide for the matters required to
be provided for by Chapters IIA, IV and V of the Council Directive.
(5) Whenever the Authority prepares or revises a broadcasting
rule relating to the matter in question every broadcaster shall complyas required with such rule and any revision of it.
(6) The Authority shall every two years, or such lesser period as it
may decide, review a broadcasting rule made under subsection (1)(c) .
(7) In carrying out a review under subsection (6) the Authority
shall consider the quality of services provided by broadcasters inendeavouring to comply with a broadcasting rule made under subsec-
tion (1)(c) .
(8) The following rules namely—
(a) Access Rules (1 January 2005) prepared under section 19
of the Act of 2001, and
(b) rules with respect to the maximum daily and hourly limits
on advertising and teleshopping continued under section19 of the Act of 2001,
if in force on the passing of this Act, continue in force as if made
under the corresponding provision of this section and have effectaccordingly.
44.—(1) Before preparing a broadcasting code or making a broad-
casting rule, the Authority shall make available for inspection onrequest by any person a draft of the broadcasting code it proposesto prepare or the broadcasting rule it proposes to make and shallhave regard to any submissions made to it, within such period as itspecifies for the purpose, by that person in relation to the draftbefore it prepares the broadcasting code or makes the broadcastingrule concerned.
(2) The Authority shall cause to be published on a website main-
tained by the Authority, and may cause to be published in a news-paper circulating in the State, notice of the fact that, under subsection
(1), a draft referred to in that subsection is available for inspection,
of the place at which or the means by which the draft can be
49Pt.3 S.43
Inspection of draft
broadcasting codesand rules.Pt.3 S.44
Presentation of
broadcasting codesand rules toMinister.
Co-operation with
other parties —standards and self-regulation.
Code of practice —
complaintshandling.
50[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
inspected and of the period specified by it under that subsection
within which submissions may be made to it in relation to the draft.
45.—(1) A copy of any broadcasting code or rule shall be
presented to the Minister as soon as may be after it is made.
(2) ( a) The Minister shall, as soon as may be after the receipt by
him or her of a copy of any broadcasting code or rulemade, cause copies of it to be laid before both Houses ofthe Oireachtas.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a broadcast-ing code or rule was laid before it in accordance withparagraph (a) , annul the code or rule.
(c) The annulment of a broadcasting code or rule under para-
graph (b) takes effect immediately on the passing of the
resolution concerned but does not affect anything thatwas done under the code or rule before the passing ofthe resolution.
(3) Subject to the requirements of section 43(6) the Authority
shall, once in each period of 4 years, beginning with the period of 4years commencing on the date of the preparation of the broadcastingcode or rule, review the effect of the broadcasting code or rule, andshall prepare a report in relation to that review and furnish the reportto the Minister.
(4) The Minister shall, as soon as may be after the receipt by him
or her of the report, cause copies of it to be laid before both Housesof the Oireachtas.
46.—(1) In this section “self-regulatory system” means a system
whereby the members of a group of persons with a shared interestvoluntarily adhere to rules or code of conduct established by thatgroup.
(2) The Authority may co-operate with or give assistance to one
or more persons (whether residing or having their principal place ofbusiness in the State or elsewhere) in—
(a) the preparation by that person or those persons of stan-
dards, or
(b) the establishment and administration by that person or
those persons of a self-regulatory system,
in respect of broadcasting content or related electronic media.
PART 4
Redress
47.—(1) A broadcaster shall give due and adequate consideration
to a complaint on one or more of the grounds specified in section
48(1) , made in writing by a person in respect of the broadcasting
service provided by the broadcaster which, in the opinion of the[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
broadcaster, has been made in good faith and is not of a frivolous or
vexatious nature.
(2) A complaint under subsection (1) shall be made to the broad-
caster not more than 30 days after—
(a) in case the complaint relates to one broadcast, the date of
the broadcast,
(b) in the case of 2 or more unrelated broadcasts, the date
of the earlier or earliest, as the case may be, of thosebroadcasts, or
(c) in case the complaint relates to 2 or more related broad-
casts of which at least 2 are made on different dates, thelater or latest of those dates.
(3) A broadcaster shall prepare and implement a code of practice
for the handling of complaints made under subsection (1) . The code
of practice shall make provision for the following matters—
(a) an initial point of contact for complainants, including an
electronic-mail address,
(b) a time period within which the broadcaster shall respond
to complaints, and
(c) the procedures to be followed by the broadcaster in the
resolution of complaints.
(4) A broadcaster shall publish on a website maintained by the
broadcaster, and generally make available, a copy of the code ofpractice prepared under subsection (3) .
(5) The Compliance Committee may prepare and publish guid-
ance for broadcasters for the purposes of ensuring compliance withsubsection (3) .
(6) A broadcaster shall supply the information required under
subsection (3) to the Compliance Committee who shall cause such
information to be published on a website maintained by theAuthority.
(7) A broadcaster shall keep a record of complaints made under
subsection (1) and of any reply made thereto for a period of 2 years
from the date of receipt of the complaint.
(8) A broadcaster shall, if directed by the Compliance Committee,
make available for inspection by the Compliance Committee allrecords kept by the broadcaster under subsection (7) .
48.—(1) Subject to this section, the Compliance Committee may
investigate and decide upon any of the following complaints—
(a) a complaint that in broadcasting news given by it and
specified in the complaint, a broadcaster did not complywith one or more of the requirements of section 39(1)(a)
and (b),
(b) a complaint that in broadcasting a programme specified in
the complaint, a broadcaster either did not comply with
51Pt.4 S.47
Complaints process.Pt.4 S.48
52[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
one or more of these requirements or was in breach of
the prohibition contained in section 39(1)(d) ,
(c) a complaint that on an occasion specified in the complaint,
there was an encroachment by a broadcaster contrary tosection 39(1)(e) ,
(d) a complaint that on an occasion specified in the complaint,
a broadcaster failed to comply with a provision of abroadcasting code providing for the matters referred toinsection 42(2)(a) to(d)and section 42(2)(f) ,(g)and (h).
(2) A complaint under subsection (1) shall be in writing and be
made to the Compliance Committee not more than 30 days after—
(a) in case the complaint relates to one broadcast, the date of
the broadcast,
(b) in the case of 2 or more unrelated broadcasts, the date
of the earlier or earliest, as the case may be, of thosebroadcasts, or
(c) in case the complaint relates to 2 or more related broad-
casts of which at least 2 are made on different dates, thelater or latest of those dates.
(3) The Compliance Committee may, at their discretion, refer the
complaint in the first instance to the broadcaster, for considerationin accordance with a code of practice prepared under section 47(3) .
(4) Where the Compliance Committee proposes to investigate a
complaint made under this section the Committee shall afford to thebroadcaster to whom the complaint relates (hereafter in this sectionreferred to as the “broadcaster concerned”) 7 days or such furtherperiod as the Committee allows to comment on the complaint.
(5) Where a complaint is made to the Compliance Committee
under subsection (1) and—
(a) a person employed by the broadcaster concerned in the
making of any programme the subject of the complaint,or
(b) if the making of any programme the subject of the com-
plaint was commissioned by the broadcaster concerned,the person commissioned to make that programme,
requests, for reasons specified by him or her, the Compliance Com-
mittee to afford to him or her an opportunity to comment on thecomplaint, the Compliance Committee shall, having considered thereasons so specified, afford to the person 7 days or such furtherperiod as the Committee allows to comment on the complaint if, butonly if, they are satisfied that, as appropriate—
(i) an interest of the person referred to in paragraph (a) ,
being an interest which the Compliance Committee con-sider relevant to the person’s employment by the broad-caster concerned, or
(ii) the prospects of the person referred to in paragraph (b)
obtaining further commissions in respect of programmesfrom the broadcaster concerned,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
may, because of the complaint, be adversely affected.
(6) When the Compliance Committee proposes to consider a
complaint that a broadcaster failed to comply with the provision ofa broadcasting code providing for the matters referred to in section
42(2)(g) or(h)the Compliance Committee shall afford the relevant
advertiser 7 days or such further period as the Committee allows tocomment on the relevant advertisement.
(7) As soon as may be after they decide on a complaint made
under this section, the Compliance Committee shall send to—
(a) the person who made the complaint, and
(b) the broadcaster concerned,
a statement in writing of their decision, including the reasons for
their decision.
(8) In case the Compliance Committee decide on a complaint that
a broadcaster failed to comply with the provision of a broadcastingcode providing for the matters referred to in section 42(2)(g) or(h),
as soon as may be after their decision, the Compliance Committeeshall (in addition to complying with the requirements of subsection
(7)) send to the person with whom the broadcaster concerned agreed
to broadcast the relevant advertisement (if he or she is not the personwho made the complaint) a statement in writing of their decision.
(9) The consideration by the Compliance Committee of a com-
plaint made to them under this section may be carried out by theCompliance Committee in private.
(10) Unless they consider it inappropriate to do so, the Com-
pliance Committee shall, as soon as may be after the making of thedecision, publish particulars of their decision on a complaint in suchmanner as they consider suitable and, without prejudice to subsection
(11), where they consider that the publication should be by the
broadcaster concerned, or should include publication by the broad-caster concerned, the particulars shall be published by the broad-caster concerned in such manner as shall be agreed between theCompliance Committee and the broadcaster concerned.
(11) Without prejudice to subsection (10) , the broadcaster con-
cerned shall, unless the Compliance Committee consider it inap-propriate for the broadcaster to do so, broadcast the ComplianceCommittee’s decision on every complaint considered by the Com-pliance Committee in which the Compliance Committee found infavour, in whole or in part, of the person who made the complaint,within 21 days of such decision and at a time and in a manner corre-sponding to that in which the broadcast to which the complaintrelates took place.
(12) As regards proceedings under this section, the Compliance
Committee does not have any power to award to any party costsor expenses.
(13) Subsection (1) does not apply to a complaint which, in the
opinion of the Compliance Committee, is not made in good faithor is frivolous or vexatious, nor, unless the Compliance Committeeconsider that there are special reasons for investigating the complaint(which reasons shall be stated by the Compliance Committee whengiving their decision), does that subsection apply to a complaintwhich is withdrawn.
53Pt.4 S.48Pt.4 S.48
Right of reply.
54[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(14) Where a matter has been the subject of multiple complaints
made under—
(a) this section, or
(b) in respect of a broadcast transmitted from another juris-
diction targeted at audiences in the State,
the Compliance Committee may review the matter concerned and,
as it considers appropriate, report to the Minister and to the relevantpublic body in such form and manner as the Committee thinks fitthe findings arising out of such review.
(15) The Compliance Committee shall endeavour to decide upon
a complaint as soon as practicable after such a complaint is received.
(16) The Compliance Committee may, where it deems it appro-
priate, hold an oral hearing in respect of proceedings under thissection.
(17) The Compliance Committee may deem a complaint made to
a broadcaster within the time periods specified in section 47(2) as
having been made within the time periods specified in subsection (2) .
49.—(1) In this section—
“requester” means a person who makes a request under subsection
(6);
“right of reply” means the broadcast by a broadcaster of a statement
prepared in accordance with a scheme;
“scheme” means a scheme under subsection (3) .
(2) Subject to this section, any person whose honour or reputation
has been impugned by an assertion of incorrect facts or informationin a broadcast shall have a right of reply.
(3) The Authority shall prepare, within 6 months of the establish-
ment day, following a period of public consultation, a scheme for theexercise of the right of reply.
(4) A scheme shall set out the procedures to be followed in the
exercise of the right of reply.
(5) In preparing a scheme the Authority shall ensure that—
(a) a right of reply shall be broadcast—
(i) within a reasonable time period subsequent to the
request for a right of reply being made, and
(ii) at a time and in a manner appropriate to the broad-
cast to which the request refers, and
(b) a right of reply shall—
(i) state to what extent the information contained in the
broadcast under subsection (2) is incorrect or mis-
leading, and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(ii) be limited to factual assertions necessary to rectify an
incomplete or otherwise distorting assertion.
(6) A person who wishes to exercise a right of reply in accordance
with a scheme shall make a request in writing addressed to thebroadcaster concerned—
(a) stating that the request is made under this section,
(b) containing sufficient particulars to enable the identifi-
cation by the taking of reasonable steps of the part of thebroadcast which asserted incorrect facts impugning thehonour or reputation of the requester, and
(c) if the requester requires the right of reply to be given in a
particular form or manner (being a form or manner whichis in accordance with the terms of any scheme) specifyingthe form or manner of the right of reply.
(7) A request for a right of reply shall be made not later than 21
days after the making of the broadcast referred to in the request,unless otherwise agreed between the requester and the broadcasterconcerned.
(8) The broadcaster shall, as soon as may be but not later than 10
days after the receipt of a request under subsection (6) —
(a) decide whether to grant or refuse the request, and
(b) cause notice in writing of the decision to be given to the
requester.
(9) Where notice of a decision under subsection (8) is not given
to the requester by the expiration of the period specified for thatpurpose a decision refusing to grant the request under subsection (6)
shall be deemed to have been made upon such expiration by thebroadcaster concerned.
(10) A broadcaster shall give due and adequate consideration to
any request under subsection (6) , which in the opinion of the broad-
caster has been made in good faith and is not of a frivolous or vex-atious nature, by a member of the public in respect of the broadcast-ing service provided by the broadcaster and shall keep due andproper records for a period of 2 years of all such requests and of anyreply made to them or of any action taken on foot of them.
(11) A broadcaster shall, if directed by the Compliance Commit-
tee, make available for inspection by the Compliance Committee allrecords kept by him or her under subsection (10) .
(12) No charge shall be made for the processing of a request
under subsection (6) by a broadcaster.
(13) In a defamation action the granting of a request for a right
of reply under this section by a defendant in respect of a statementto which the action relates—
(a) does not constitute an express or implied admission of
liability by that defendant, and
(b) is not relevant to the determination of liability in the
action.
55Pt.4 S.49Pt.4 S.49
56[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(14) In a defamation action the defendant may give evidence in
mitigation of damage, that he or she granted or offered to grant aright of reply under this section to the plaintiff in respect of thestatement to which the action relates, either—
(a) before the bringing of the action, or
(b) as soon as practicable thereafter, in circumstances where
the action was commenced before there was an oppor-tunity to grant or offer to grant a right of reply.
(15) In a defamation action, a defendant who intends to give evi-
dence to which subsection (14) applies shall, at the time of the filing
or delivery of the defence to the action, notify the plaintiff in writingof his or her intention to give such evidence.
(16) Evidence of the granting of a right of reply under this section
by a broadcaster in respect of a statement to which the action relatesis not admissible in any civil proceedings as evidence of liability ofthe defendant.
(17) Subject to this section, the Compliance Committee, on appli-
cation to them in that behalf, in writing, by a requester, shall ende-avor to within 21 days after the receipt of such an application, reviewa decision to refuse by a broadcaster under subsection (8) or(9)and
as they consider appropriate—
(a) affirm the decision, or
(b) annul the decision and require the broadcaster concerned
to broadcast the Compliance Committee’s decisionincluding any correction of inaccurate facts or infor-mation relating to the individual concerned within 7 daysof such decision being communicated to the broadcasterand at a time and in a manner corresponding to that inwhich the broadcast to which the request relates tookplace,
in accordance with this section.
(18) An application under subsection (17) shall be made to the
Compliance Committee not more than 21 days after receipt of adecision to refuse under subsection (8) or(9).
(19) Where the Compliance Committee propose to investigate an
application made under subsection (17) , the Compliance Committee
shall afford to the broadcaster to whom the application relates(hereafter in this section referred to as the “broadcaster concerned”)an opportunity to comment on the application.
(20) As soon as may be after they decide on an application made
under subsection (17) , the Compliance Committee shall send to—
(a) the person who made the application, and
(b) the broadcaster concerned,
a statement in writing of their decision, including the reasons for
their decision.
(21) The Compliance Committee may reject any request for a
right of reply where it is of the opinion inter alia that—[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) the request is of a frivolous or vexatious nature or was not
made in good faith,
(b) a right of reply is manifestly unnecessary owing to the
minor significance of the error in the broadcast com-plained of,
(c) the proposed right of reply cites untrue information or
assertions,
(d) the proposed right of reply is a personal opinion,
(e) the proposed right of reply is an assessment or warning
against the future conduct of a person,
(f) satisfaction of the proposed right of reply would involve a
punishable act,
(g) satisfaction of the proposed right of reply would be harm-
ful or offensive,
(h) satisfaction of the proposed right of reply would render
the broadcaster liable to civil law proceedings,
(i) satisfaction of the proposed right of reply would breach a
broadcaster’s statutory obligation,
(j) satisfaction of the proposed right of reply would breach
the terms of a broadcaster’s contract under Part 6 with
the Authority,
(k) the person who was injured by the contested information
has no legally justifiable actual interest in the publicationof a right of reply,
(l) the original broadcast also contained a statement from the
person affected and such contents are equivalent to aright of reply,
(m) an equivalent editorial correction has been made and the
person affected informed,
(n) the content of the proposed right of reply would violate
the rights of a third party,
(o) the matter concerned relates to reports on public sessions
of the Houses of the Oireachtas or the Courts,
(p) the matter concerned relates to a party political broadcast,
(q) the matter concerned relates to a broadcast under section
3 of the Act of 1998,
(r) the broadcast of a right of reply is not in the public
interest, or
(s) the application was not made within the period specified
insubsection (18) .
(22) Where the Compliance Committee finds that the broadcaster
has failed to comply with a decision under subsection (17) the Com-
pliance Committee shall notify the broadcaster of those findings andgive the broadcaster an opportunity to make representations in
57Pt.4 S.49Pt.4 S.49
58[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
relation to the notification or remedy any non-compliance, not later
than—
(a) 10 days after issue of the notification, or
(b) the end of such longer period as is agreed by the Com-
pliance Committee with the broadcaster concerned.
(23) Where, at the end of the period referred to in subsection (22) ,
the Compliance Committee is of the opinion that the broadcasterconcerned has not remedied its non-compliance, the ComplianceCommittee may recommend to the Authority, and the Authorityshall follow such recommendation, that the Authority apply to theHigh Court for such order as may be appropriate in order to ensurecompliance with a decision under subsection (17) .
(24) The High Court may, as it thinks fit, on the hearing of the
application make an order—
(a) compelling compliance with a decision under subsection
(17),
(b) varying a requirement under subsection (17) ,o r
(c) refusing the application.
(25) A scheme shall be—
(a) published by the Authority on a website maintained by
the Authority, and
(b) carried out in accordance with its terms by the Com-
pliance Committee.
(26) ( a) A scheme shall be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas by the Minister as soon as may be after itis prepared.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a schemewas laid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) , annul
the scheme.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of a scheme takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done underthe scheme before the passing of the resolution.
(27) The Authority shall review and report to the Minister on the
operation, effectiveness and impact of a scheme not later than 3years from the date on which it comes into operation and every 5years thereafter or at such time as may be requested by the Minister.
(28) A copy of a report under subsection (27) shall be laid by the
Minister before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may beafter it has been made to him or her.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
PART 5
Enforcement
Chapter 1
Compliance with terms of contract
50.—(1) The Compliance Committee may for any of the reasons
specified in subsection (2) conduct an investigation into the oper-
ational, programming, financial, technical or other affairs of a holderof a contract under Part 6 or8(“contractor”).
(2) The Compliance Committee may conduct, by appointing as an
investigator a member of the staff of the Authority or another personthe Committee considers to be suitably qualified to conduct, aninvestigation under this section if it has reasonable grounds forbelieving that a contractor is not providing a service in accordancewith the terms of the contractor’s contract.
(3) The Compliance Committee shall notify the contractor con-
cerned of the matter under investigation and afford the contractoran opportunity to respond, within 7 days of the date of the notifi-cation, or such further period as the Committee allows, to the matterunder investigation. It is the duty of the contractor to co-operate inthe investigation.
(4) An investigator may for the purposes of an investigation under
this section require the contractor concerned to—
(a) produce to the investigator such information or records in
the contractor’s possession or control relevant to theinvestigation,
(b) allow the investigator to enter the premises of the contrac-
tor to conduct such inspections and make such examin-ations of broadcasting equipment found there, and
(c) where appropriate, attend before the investigator for the
purposes of the investigation.
(5) Where an investigator, having conducted an investigation
under subsection (2), forms a view that a contractor is not providing
the service referred to in that subsection in accordance with theterms of the contractor’s contract, then he or she shall notify thefinding to the contractor and afford that contractor an opportunityto make submissions in accordance with any rules made under sub-
section (8) at a hearing before the Compliance Committee in respect
of the matter under investigation.
(6) The contractor concerned shall supply the Compliance Com-
mittee with such information and records the Committee considersnecessary for the purposes of a hearing.
(7) After consideration of submissions (if any) made by the con-
tractor concerned under subsection (5) , the Compliance Committee
may—
(a) make a finding that the contractor is not providing the
service referred to in subsection (2) in accordance with
the terms of the contractor’s contract, or
59Investigation into
affairs ofcontractor.Pt.5 S.50
Termination or
suspension ofcontract under Part
6or8.
60[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) make such other finding as it considers appropriate in
the circumstances.
(8) The Compliance Committee shall make rules providing for the
conduct of a hearing under subsection (5) . The rules shall provide
for the period in which submissions under subsection (5) are to be
made. The rules may include provision for an oral or other form ofhearing, as appropriate.
(9) In this section “investigator” means a person appointed as
such under subsection (2).
51.—(1) Without prejudice to any specific provision of this Act,
or of a contract made under it, the Compliance Committee mayrecommend to the Authority that the Authority terminate or sus-pend, for such period of suspension as the Compliance Committeeconsiders reasonable and specifies in the recommendation, a contractentered into by the Authority under Part 6 or8—
(a) if any false or misleading information of a material nature
was given to the Contract Awards Committee by or onbehalf of the holder of the contract before it was enteredinto, or
(b) if the holder of the contract has, upon a finding by the
Compliance Committee under section 50(7) , having
regard to the investigation concerned under that section,failed on one or more occasions to comply with a termor condition of the contract and the nature of that failureis of such seriousness as, in the opinion of the ComplianceCommittee, warrants the termination or suspension ofthe contract,
and the Authority shall—
(i) where the Compliance Committee recommends that the
contract be suspended, suspend the contract concernedfor such period as the Compliance Committee recom-mends or, having regard to all the circumstances, for suchlesser period as the Authority considers appropriate, or
(ii) where the Compliance Committee recommends that the
contract be terminated, terminate the contract concernedor, having regard to all the circumstances, suspend thecontract for such period as the Authority considersappropriate.
(2) Where the Compliance Committee proposes to make a recom-
mendation under subsection (1) the Committee shall by notification
afford the holder of the contract concerned an opportunity to makesubmissions, in accordance with any rules made under subsection (3) ,
at a hearing before the Committee in respect of the matter underconsideration.
(3) The Compliance Committee shall make rules providing for the
conduct of a hearing under subsection (2) . The rules shall provide
for the period in which submissions under subsection (2) are to be
made. The rules may include provision for an oral or other form ofhearing, as appropriate.
(4) A decision to terminate or suspend a contract by the Auth-
ority under this section, any other provision of this Act or a provision[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
of the contract, may be appealed by the holder of the contract to the
High Court.
(5) The members of the Authority making a decision under sub-
section (1)(i) or(ii)in relation to the suspension or termination of a
contract shall not include a member of the Compliance Committeewho made the recommendation to the Authority. The Authority mayallow the holder of the contract concerned to make further sub-missions to it, if it considers it appropriate, in accordance with anyrules it makes (which may include the possibility of a hearing).
(6) A contract terminated or suspended under this section, under
any other provision of this Act or under a provision of the con-tract, shall—
(a) in case it is terminated, cease to have effect, and
(b) in case it is suspended, cease to have effect for the period
for which it is suspended.
Chapter 2
Financial Sanctions
52.—In this Chapter—
“Court” means High Court;“breach” means a serious or repeated failure by a broadcaster to
comply with a requirement referred to in section 53(1) ;
“financial sanction” means a specified amount to be paid by a broad-
caster for a breach by the broadcaster as directed by the Court undersection 55(1) or the Authority under section 55(3) ;
“investigation” means an investigation by an investigating officer
into any of the matters referred to in section 53(1) ;
“investigating officer” means a person appointed as such under
section 53(1).
53.—(1) The Compliance Committee shall, subject to subsection
(2), appoint a member of the staff of the Authority, or such other
person as the Committee considers to be suitably qualified to be aninvestigating officer for the purposes of this Chapter where it is ofthe opinion that there are circumstances suggesting that it is appro-priate to investigate and report on any apparent breach by a broad-caster of a requirement of section 39(1) ,40(1) ,(2)or(3),41(2) ,(3)
or(4),106(3) or127(6) or a broadcasting code or rule.
(2) The terms of appointment of an investigating officer under
this section shall relate to the particular apparent breach being inves-tigated and may define the scope of his or her investigation, whetheras respects the matters or the period to which it is to extend or other-wise, and in particular may limit the investigation to matters connec-ted with particular circumstances.
(3) Where the Compliance Committee appoints an investigating
officer to investigate and report on an apparent breach by a broad-caster, the investigating officer shall—
61Pt.5 S.51
Definitions
(Chapter 2 ).
Investigation into
affairs ofbroadcaster.Pt.5 S.53
62[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) notify the broadcaster (“broadcaster concerned”) of the
matter under investigation,
(b) supply the broadcaster with copies of any documents rel-
evant to the investigation, and
(c) afford to the broadcaster an opportunity to respond,
within 7 days of the date of the notification, or suchfurther period not exceeding 21 days as the Committeeallows, to the matter under investigation.
(4) It is the duty of the broadcaster concerned to co-operate in
any such investigation and provide the investigating officer with suchinformation as he or she considers necessary for the purposes ofthe investigation.
(5) Where the Compliance Committee appoints an investigating
officer to investigate and report on an apparent breach and either—
(a) a person employed by the broadcaster concerned, or
(b) if the making of any programme, the subject of such an
investigation, was commissioned by the broadcaster con-cerned, the person commissioned to make thatprogramme,
requests, for reasons specified by the person, that the Compliance
Committee afford to him or her an opportunity to comment within7 days, or such further period not exceeding 21 days as the Commit-tee allows, on the matter under investigation, then the ComplianceCommittee shall, having considered the reasons so specified, requirethe investigating officer to afford to the person such an opportunity,if the Committee is satisfied that—
(i) in the case of a person referred to in paragraph (a) ,a n
interest of the person, which the Compliance Committeeconsiders relevant to the person’s employment by thebroadcaster concerned, is involved,
(ii) in the case of a person referred to in paragraph (b) , the
prospects of the person obtaining further commissions inrespect of programmes from the broadcaster concerned,may, because of the matter under investigation, beadversely affected, or
(iii) in the case of a person referred to in paragraph (a) or(b),
it is in the interests of fairness to do so, having regard toany potential consequences for the good name of theperson.
(6) Where the Compliance Committee proposes to investigate
non-compliance by a broadcaster with a broadcasting code whichprovides for any of the matters referred to in section 42(2)(g) or(h),
the investigating officer shall afford to the person employing suchmatter in a broadcasting service an opportunity to comment within7 days of notification, or such further period not exceeding 21 days asthe Committee allows, in relation to the matter under investigation.
(7) An investigating officer may for the purposes of this section
require the broadcaster concerned to—[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) provide to the investigating officer such information or
records in the broadcaster’s possession or control rel-evant to the investigation, and
(b) where appropriate, attend before the investigating officer
for the purposes of the investigation.
54.—(1) ( a) Where an investigating officer forms the view that
there has been a breach in respect of any matter whichhe or she is investigating or the broadcaster concernedhas failed to co-operate with the investigation, the officershall report this to the Compliance Committee.
(b) The report of an investigating officer in relation to an
investigation to the Compliance Committee shallinclude—
(i) the investigating officer’s findings in relation to the
matter,
(ii) any response received under section 53(3) or com-
ment received under section 53(5) or(6),
(iii) details of any failure by the broadcaster concerned to
comply with section 53(7) , and
(iv) the recommendation of the investigating officer.
(2) Where an investigating officer forms a view that there has
been a breach by the broadcaster concerned or that the broadcasterhas not co-operated with the investigation, the broadcaster shall beafforded the opportunity of making a submission to the ComplianceCommittee within 10 days of being notified of the investigatingofficer’s views and recommendation.
(3) Where the Compliance Committee, having considered a
report under subsection (1) and any submissions made under subsec-
tion (2) , finds that—
(a) there has been a breach by the broadcaster concerned, or
(b) the broadcaster concerned has failed to co-operate in an
investigation,
the Committee may recommend to the Authority that the Authority
notify the broadcaster concerned in accordance with subsection (4) .
The Authority shall comply with the recommendation.
(4) A notification under subsection (3) shall—
(a) set out the reasons for the notification,
(b) state that the Authority intends to apply to the Court for
a determination that there has been a breach or a failureto co-operate with an investigation, unless the broad-caster concerned requests, in writing within 14 days ofthe date of the notification or such further period as theAuthority allows, that the Authority deal with the matterunder section 55(2) , and
63Pt.5 S.53
Report, findings,
recommendationsand proceduresrelating to outcomeof investigation.Pt.5 S.54
Financial sanctions.
64[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(c) indicate the amount of the financial sanction (not
exceeding \250,000) that it proposes, if the matter is dealt
with by the Authority under section 55(2) ,
and the Authority may indicate in the notification the amount of the
financial sanction (not exceeding \250,000) that it intends to recom-
mend to the Court if the matter is dealt with by the Court undersection 55(1) .
(5) Where the broadcaster concerned fails to make a request
under subsection (4)(b) within the period referred to in that para-
graph or informs the Authority that no such request will be made,the Authority shall apply to the Court for a determination that therehas been a breach or a failure to co-operate with an investigation bythe broadcaster concerned.
(6) Where a broadcaster makes a request under subsection (4)(b) ,
the Authority shall afford the broadcaster an opportunity to makesubmissions at a hearing before the Authority in respect of thematter.
(7) Where a broadcaster takes the opportunity to make sub-
missions at a hearing under subsection (6) , the members of the Auth-
ority conducting the hearing shall not include any person who was amember of the Compliance Committee which appointed aninvestigating officer under section 53(1) to investigate the alleged
breach and made a recommendation under subsection (3) .
(8) The Authority shall make rules providing for the conduct of
a hearing under subsection (6) . The rules may include provision for
an oral or other form of hearing, as appropriate, and for the takingof evidence whether orally or otherwise, as appropriate, and theapplicable rules of evidence.
(9) The Authority may not award costs or expenses to any party
in relation to a hearing under subsection (6) .
55.—(1) The Court, in any application made to it under section
54(5) —
(a) may—
(i) make a determination that there has been a breach or
a failure to co-operate with an investigation by thebroadcaster concerned,
(ii) if it thinks fit direct, having regard to any amount the
Authority recommends and taking into consider-ation the matters referred to in section 56 , that the
broadcaster concerned shall pay to the Authority afinancial sanction not exceeding \250,000, in respect
of the breach or failure to co-operate with the inves-tigation in question, and
(iii) make such order it considers appropriate,
or
(b) may dismiss the application,
and the Court may make such order as to costs as it thinks fit in
respect of the application.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) Where a request in writing has been made to it by a broad-
caster under section 54(4) , the Authority may make a determination
that there has or has not been a breach or a failure to co-operatewith an investigation by the broadcaster concerned and issue a state-ment of findings to the broadcaster.
(3) Where the Authority determines under subsection (2) that
there has been a breach or a failure to co-operate with an investi-gation by the broadcaster concerned, the Authority may direct, tak-ing into consideration and having regard to the matters referred toinsection 56 , that the broadcaster shall pay the Authority a financial
sanction not exceeding the amount as proposed in a notificationgiven to the broadcaster in accordance with section 54(4)(c) ,i n
respect of the breach or the failure to co-operate with an inves-tigation.
(4) The Authority may publish on a website maintained by the
Authority such details as it considers proper concerning a decisionof the Court under subsection (1) or such a statement of findings
made by it under subsection (2) .
(5) A broadcaster may appeal to the Court against either or both
a statement of findings issued in respect of the broadcaster under
subsection (2) and a financial sanction imposed against the broad-
caster under subsection (3) .
(6) A sum due under this section may be recovered in any court
of competent jurisdiction as a simple contract debt.
(7) All payments made to the Authority under this section shall
be paid into or disposed of for the benefit of the Exchequer in suchmanner as the Minister for Finance may direct.
56.—In considering the amount (if any) of any financial sanction
to be imposed on a broadcaster under section 55 the Authority or
the Court shall take into account the circumstances of the breach orthe failure to co-operate with an investigation in question, as thecase may be, and shall, where appropriate in the circumstances, haveregard to—
(a) the need to ensure that any financial sanction imposed—
(i) is appropriate and proportionate to the breach or the
failure to co-operate with the investigation, and
(ii) will act as a sufficient incentive to ensure future com-
pliance in respect of the requirement breached,
(b) the seriousness of the breach,
(c) the turnover of the broadcaster in the financial year ending
in the year previous to the breach and the ability of thebroadcaster to pay the amount,
(d) the extent of any failure to co-operate with the inves-
tigation,
(e) any excuse or explanation by the broadcaster for the
breach or failure to co-operate with the investigation,
65Pt.5 S.55
Matters to be
considered indetermining theamount of financialsanction.Pt.5 S.56
66[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(f) any gain (financial or otherwise) made by the broadcaster
or by any person in which the broadcaster has a financialinterest as a consequence of the breach,
(g) the appropriateness of the time when the programme
material concerned was broadcast,
(h) the degree of harm caused or increased cost incurred by
audiences, consumers or other sectoral or market partici-pants as a consequence of the breach,
(i) audience expectations as to the nature of the programme
material,
(j) the duration of the breach,
(k) repeated breaches by the broadcaster,
(l) continuation by the broadcaster of—
(i) the breach, or
(ii) the broadcasting of the matter to which an investi-
gation relates after being notified of the investigationunder section 53(3)(a) ,
(m) the extent to which—
(i) the management of the broadcaster knew, or ought to
have known, that the breach was occurring or wouldoccur, and
(ii) any breach was caused by a third party, or any rel-
evant circumstances beyond the control of thebroadcaster,
(n) the absence, ineffectiveness or repeated failure of internal
mechanisms or procedures of the broadcaster intended toprevent breach by the broadcaster,
(o) the extent to which the broadcaster had taken steps in
advance to identify and mitigate external factors thatmight result in a breach,
(p) the extent and timeliness of any steps taken to end the
breach in question, and any steps taken for remedyingthe consequences of the breach,
(q) submissions by the broadcaster on the appropriate amount
of a financial sanction,
(r) whether a financial sanction in respect of similar conduct
has already been imposed on the broadcaster by theCourt or Authority, and
(s) any precedents set by the Court or Authority in respect of
previous breaches or failures to co-operate with an inves-tigation.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Chapter 3
Notifications
57.—(1) Where a notification is required under this Part to be
given to a broadcaster or contractor, it shall be addressed to thebroadcaster or contractor and shall be given to the broadcaster orcontractor in one of the following ways—
(a) by delivering it to the broadcaster or contractor,
(b) by leaving it at the address at which the broadcaster or
contractor carries on business,
(c) by sending it by post in a pre-paid registered letter
addressed to the broadcaster or contractor at the addressat which the broadcaster or contractor carries onbusiness,
(d) if an address for the service of a notification has been fur-
nished by the broadcaster or contractor, by leaving it at,or sending it by pre-paid registered post addressed to thebroadcaster or contractor to, that address, or
(e) by sending it by means of electronic mail or a facsimile
machine, to a device or facility for the reception of elec-tronic mail or facsimiles located at the address at whichthe broadcaster or contractor carries on business or, if anaddress for the service of a notification has been fur-nished by the broadcaster or contractor, that address, butonly if—
(i) the sender’s—
(I) facility for the reception of electronic mail gener-
ates a message confirming a receipt of the elec-tronic mail, or
(II) facsimile machine generates a message con-
firming successful transmission of the totalnumber of pages of the notification,
and
(ii) the notification is also given in one of the other ways
mentioned in any of the preceding paragraphs.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a company registered
under the Companies Acts is deemed to be ordinarily resident at itsregistered office, and every other body corporate and every unincor-porated body is deemed to be ordinarily resident at its principaloffice or place of business.
(3) A copy of a notification, which has endorsed on it a certificate
purporting to be signed by an investigator under Chapter 1 or
investigating officer under Chapter 2 , as the case may be, stating that
the copy is a true copy of the notification may, without proof ofsignature of that person, be produced in every court or before theAuthority and in all legal proceedings and is evidence, unless thecontrary is shown, of the notification.
67Pt.5
Notifications.Pt.5 S.57
Interpretation ( Part
6).
Broadcasting
licence.
Variation of
broadcastinglicence.
68[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(4) In this section “notification” means a notification under this
Part.
PART 6
Broadcasting Contracts and Content Provision Contracts —
Commercial and Community Broadcasters
58.—(1) In this Part—
“broadcasting licence” means a licence granted under section 59 ;
“sound broadcasting contract” means a contract entered into under
section 63 ;
“television programme service contract” means a contract entered
into under section 70 .
(2) Any contract in respect of broadcasting entered into under an
enactment repealed by section 3 by the BCI with another person
which is in force immediately before the passing of this Act continuesin force as if made under the corresponding provision of this Partand has effect accordingly.
59.—(1) The Authority shall not authorise a broadcasting contrac-
tor to operate a broadcasting transmitter and provide a broadcastingservice under a broadcasting contract unless and until the Communi-cations Regulator has granted under this subsection to the Authoritya licence (“broadcasting licence”) under section 5 of the Act of 1926in respect of the sound or television broadcasting transmitter towhich the contract relates.
(2) A broadcasting licence shall be valid only for such period of
time as a broadcasting contract between the Authority and a broad-casting contractor is in force.
(3) Every broadcasting contract shall contain a condition requir-
ing the broadcasting contractor concerned to establish, maintain andoperate the broadcasting transmitter concerned in accordance withsuch terms and conditions as the Communications Regulatorattaches to the broadcasting licence to which the contract relates(including any variations made to it in accordance with section 60 ),
and so long as the terms and conditions are complied with, the con-tract has the effect of conveying the benefits of the licence to thebroadcasting contractor and any such transmitter so established,maintained and operated shall be deemed to be licensed for the pur-poses of the Act of 1926.
(4) Every broadcasting licence shall be open to inspection by
members of the public at the Authority’s registered office, at suchtimes as the Authority considers reasonable during office openinghours.
60.—(1) The Communications Regulator may vary any term or
condition of a broadcasting licence—
(a) if it appears to it to be necessary so to do in the interest
of good radio frequency management,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) for the purpose of giving effect to any international agree-
ment to which the State is a party and which has beenratified by the State and which relates to broadcasting,
(c) if it appears to it to be in the public interest so to do,
(d) if it appears to it to be necessary for the safety or security
of persons or property so to do,
(e) on request from the Authority after consultation with any
affected broadcasting contractor, or
(f) on request from the Authority on behalf of a broadcast-
ing contractor.
(2) ( a) If the Communications Regulator, for any reason specified
inparagraph (a) ,(b)or(c)ofsubsection (1) proposes
to vary, under this section, any term or condition of abroadcasting licence, the Regulator shall, by notice inwriting, inform the Authority of the Regulator’s inten-tions and of the reasons for it. The Authority shall, within7 days of receiving the notice, give notice in writing tothe broadcasting contractor concerned of the intention.
(b) The broadcasting contractor shall have the right to make
representations in writing to the Authority in respect ofthe Communications Regulator’s intentions, within 21days after the service of the notice by the Authority.
(c) The Authority shall transmit any such representations to
the Communications Regulator within a further 7 daysand the Communications Regulator, having consideredthe representations, may make such decision thereon asseems to it to be appropriate.
(3) ( a) If, having considered the representations (if any) which
have been notified to it by the Authority by or on behalfof a broadcasting contractor, the Communications Regu-lator decides to vary any term or condition of a licence,it shall, by notice in writing, inform the Authority of itsdecision.
(b) The Authority shall, within 7 days of receipt of the
Communications Regulator’s decision by notice in writ-ing inform the broadcasting contractor of that decision.
(c) On and from the day following service on the contractor
of notice of the Communications Regulator’s decision thelicence shall have effect subject to the variation of it bythat decision.
(4) Where a notice is required under this section to be given to
the Authority or a broadcasting contractor, it shall be addressed tothe Authority or the broadcasting contractor and shall be given tothe Authority or the broadcasting contractor in one of the follow-ing ways—
(a) by delivering it to the Authority or the broadcasting
contractor,
(b) by leaving it at the address at which the Authority or the
broadcasting contractor carries on business,
69Pt.6 S.60Pt.6 S.60
Emergencies.
70[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(c) by sending it by post in a pre-paid registered letter
addressed to the Authority or the broadcasting contrac-tor at the address at which the Authority or the broad-casting contractor carries on business,
(d) if an address for the service of a notice has been furnished
by the Authority or the broadcasting contractor, by leav-ing it at, or sending it by pre-paid registered postaddressed to the Authority or the broadcasting contrac-tor to, that address, or
(e) by sending it by means of electronic mail or a facsimile
machine, to a device or facility for the reception of elec-tronic mail or facsimiles located at the address at whichthe Authority or the broadcasting contractor carries onbusiness or, if an address for the service of a notificationhas been furnished by the Authority or the broadcastingcontractor, that address, but only if—
(i) the sender’s—
(I) facility for the reception of electronic mail gener-
ates a message confirming a receipt of the elec-tronic mail, or
(II) facsimile machine generates a message con-
firming successful transmission of the totalnumber of pages of the notice,
and
(ii) the notice is also given in one of the other ways men-
tioned in any of the preceding paragraphs.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (4) , a company registered
under the Companies Acts is deemed to be ordinarily resident at itsregistered office, and every other body corporate and every unincor-porated body is deemed to be ordinarily resident at its principaloffice or place of business.
61.—(1) In this section “network provider” means a person pro-
viding or operating an electronic communications network which isused for the distribution, transmission or retransmission of broad-casting services to the public.
(2) During the continuance of any national emergency, the Mini-
ster may suspend any broadcasting licence or multiplex licence asdefined in section 129 and, while any such suspension continues, the
Minister may operate any service which was provided under the sus-pended licence or require such service to be operated as he or shedirects.
(3) The Authority shall have the power to require broadcasting
contractors and network providers to co-operate with the relevantpublic bodies in the dissemination of relevant information to thepublic in the event of a major emergency.
(4) If and whenever the Minister shall exercise the powers con-
ferred on him or her by subsection (2) the broadcasting contractor
or multiplex contractor shall be entitled to receive from the Minister,with the consent of the Minister for Finance—[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) such sums as are required to defray any expenses which,
regard being had to the nature of the emergency, havebeen properly and necessarily incurred by the broadcast-
ing contractor or multiplex contractor and for meetingwhich revenue is by reason of the exercise of such powersnot otherwise available to the broadcasting contractor ormultiplex contractor, and
(b) compensation for any damage done to any property of the
broadcasting contractor or multiplex contractor, beingdamage directly attributable to the exercise of suchpowers.
(5) At the request of the Minister, the Authority shall direct a
broadcasting contractor to allocate broadcasting time for announce-ments for and on behalf of any Minister of the Government, in theevent of a major emergency, in connection with the functions of thatMinister of the Government. The broadcasting contractor shall com-ply with the direction.
(6) At the request of the Minister, the Authority shall direct a
network provider, in a manner to be specified by the Authority, tocarry broadcast announcements for and on behalf of any Minister ofthe Government, in the event of a major emergency, in connectionwith the functions of that Minister of the Government. The networkprovider shall comply with the direction.
(7) In complying with a direction under subsection (5) or(6)a
broadcasting contractor or network provider may broadcast anannouncement that it has received such a direction from theAuthority.
62.—The Contract Awards Committee shall not recommend to the
Authority the grant of a sound broadcasting contract to a personwho has been convicted of an offence under section 3(3) (insertedbysection 181(2) ) of the Act of 1926 or under section 3, 4 or 5 of
the Act of 1988 if the conviction occurred less than 12 months beforethe first day on which the person proposes to engage in sound broad-casting activities to which the application for the sound broadcastingcontract relates.
63.—The Authority, on the recommendation of the Contract
Awards Committee, shall enter into contracts (“sound broadcastingcontracts”) with persons (“sound broadcasting contractors”) underwhich the sound broadcasting contractors have, subject to this Part,the right and duty to establish, maintain and operate sound broad-casting transmitters serving the areas specified in the sound broad-casting contract and to provide, as the sound broadcasting contractmay specify, a sound broadcasting service.
64.—The Authority, on the recommendation of the Contract
Awards Committee, may enter into a class of sound broadcastingcontract (“community sound broadcasting contract”) with 2 or moremembers of a local community or of a community of interest if it issatisfied that—
(a) those members are representative of, and accountable to,
the community concerned, and
71Pt.6 S.61
Restriction on
award of soundbroadcastingcontract.
Sound broadcasting
contracts.
Community sound
broadcastingcontracts.Pt.6 S.64
Applications for
sound broadcastingcontracts.
72[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) the supply of programme material in pursuance of the con-
tract will be effected with the sole objective of—
(i) specifically addressing the interests of, and seeking to
provide a social benefit to, the community con-cerned, and
(ii) achieving a monetary reward of no greater amount
than is reasonably necessary to defray the expensesthat will be incurred in effecting that supply.
65.—(1) In order to secure the orderly development of broadcast-
ing services and to allow for the establishment of a diversity ofservices in an area catering for a wide range of tastes including thoseof minority interests, the Authority shall liaise and consult with theCommunications Regulator in the preparation by that body of anallocation plan for the frequency range dedicated to soundbroadcasting.
(2) The Authority, having regard to an allocation plan under sub-
section (1) and after consultation with the Communications Regu-
lator, in respect of the availability of radio frequencies for soundbroadcasting services shall—
(a) specify the area (which area may consist of the whole or
any part of the State) in relation to which applicationsfor a sound broadcasting contract are to be invited, and
(b) direct the Contract Awards Committee to invite appli-
cations for sound broadcasting contracts for the areaspecified and the Committee shall comply with suchdirection.
(3) Where the Authority proposes to specify an area under sub-
section (2) , the Authority may conduct, or arrange for there to be
conducted, either or both—
(a) a study in that area or amongst a community of interest
for the purposes of ascertaining the interests and wishesof that area or community in respect of sound broadcast-ing services, or
(b) a study as to the sectoral impact of an additional sound
broadcasting contract in that area.
(4) The Authority shall publish the results of any study conducted
under subsection (3) on a website maintained by the Authority.
(5) The Authority may direct the Contract Awards Committee to
consider the results of a study conducted under subsection (3) in
complying with a direction under subsection (2) , and the Contract
Awards Committee shall comply with such an additional direction.
(6) On receipt of a direction from the Authority under subsection
(2)the Contract Awards Committee may, in accordance with the
terms of any such direction, by public notice invite expressions ofinterest in the securing of contracts for sound broadcasting servicesunder this Act. Any expressions of interest must be made within 60days of the date of such notice and must indicate in general termsthe type of service that would be provided and shall not be regardedas an application for a sound broadcasting contract.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(7) A public notice under subsection (6) may invite all interested
parties to express their views on the type of sound broadcastingservice proposed.
(8) The Contract Awards Committee shall, subject to this Part,
invite applications for a sound broadcasting contract for the pro-vision of a sound broadcasting service in each area specified by theAuthority under subsection (2) and, subject to this Part, may recom-
mend that the Authority enter into such contract, and the Authorityshall follow any such recommendation.
(9) Where the Contract Awards Committee invites applications
for a sound broadcasting contract for the provision of a sound broad-casting service it shall by public notice specify the area in relation towhich the sound broadcasting service is to be provided pursuant tosuch contract and by such notice shall invite persons interested inproviding such a service to apply for such contract.
(10) In considering applications for the award of a sound broad-
casting contract the Contract Awards Committee shall determineapplications in accordance with section 66 and assign a score to each,
or a combination of, the criteria specified in section 66(2) and the
Contract Awards Committee shall inform each person who has indi-cated his or her intention of being an applicant for a contract ofsuch assignment.
(11) The Contract Awards Committee shall in reaching its
decision as to the award of a sound broadcasting contract assign anagreed score to each of the applications received in accordance withsubsection (10) .
(12) The Contract Awards Committee’s view on an assignment of
a score under subsection (11) shall be determined by a majority of
the votes of the members of the Contract Awards Committee.
(13) Every notice under subsection (9) shall—
(a) be published on a website maintained by the Authority,
and where appropriate, in a newspaper circulating in thearea to be served,
(b) specify the procedure to be followed in order to make an
application, and
(c) specify any other matters which appear to the Contract
Awards Committee to be necessary or relevant.
66.—(1) The Contract Awards Committee shall, in accordance
with this Part, consider every application received by it—
(a) for a sound broadcasting contract made under section
65(8) ,o r
(b) for a television programme service contract,
for the purpose of determining the most suitable applicant, if any, to
be awarded a broadcasting contract.
(2) In the consideration of applications referred to in subsection
(1)received by it and in determining the most suitable applicant to
be awarded a broadcasting contract, the Contract Awards Commit-tee shall have regard to—
73Pt.6 S.65
Determination of
applications foraward of soundbroadcastingcontracts andtelevisionprogramme servicecontract.Pt.6 S.66
74[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) the character, expertise and experience of the applicant or,
if the applicant is a body corporate, the character expert-ise and experience of the body and its directors, manager,secretary or other similar officer and its members and thepersons entitled to the beneficial ownership of its shares,
(b) the adequacy of the financial resources that will be avail-
able to each applicant and the extent to which the appli-cation accords with good business and economicprinciples,
(c) the quality, range and type of the programmes proposed
to be provided by each applicant or, if there is only oneapplicant, by that applicant,
(d) the quantity, quality, range and type of programmes in the
Irish language and the extent of programmes relating toIrish culture proposed to be provided,
(e) the extent to which the applicant will create within the
proposed broadcasting service new opportunities for tal-ent in music, drama and entertainment and in particularin respect of Irish culture,
(f) the desirability of having a diversity of services in the area
specified in the notice catering for a wide range of tastesincluding those of minority interests,
(g) the desirability of allowing any person, or group of per-
sons, to have control of, or substantial interests in, anundue number of sound broadcasting services in respectof which a sound broadcasting contract has been awardedunder this Part,
(h) the desirability of allowing any person, or group of per-
sons, to have control of, or substantial interests in, anundue number of sound broadcasting services in the areaspecified in the notice,
(i) the desirability of allowing any person, or group of per-
sons, to have control of, or substantial interests in, anundue amount of the communications media in the areaspecified in the notice,
(j) the extent to which the service proposed—
(i) serves recognisably local communities and is sup-
ported by the various interests in the community, or
(ii) serves communities of interest,
(k) any other matters which the Contract Awards Committee
considers to be necessary to secure the orderly develop-ment of broadcasting services, and
(l) where directed by the Authority, any of—
(i) the amount of a single cash sum payment, as specified
by the applicant during the course of his or her appli-cation, which the applicant is willing to pay to theAuthority in respect of the award of the broadcast-ing contract,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(ii) the amount of a periodic cash sum payment, as speci-
fied by the applicant during the course of his or herapplication, which the applicant is willing to pay tothe Authority in respect of the award of the broad-casting contract, and
(iii) the amount of a periodic cash sum payment deter-
mined by reference to a variable, as specified by theapplicant during the course of his or her application,which the applicant is willing to pay to the Authorityin respect of the award of the broadcasting contract.
(3) In considering the suitability of any applicant for the award of
a sound broadcasting contract to provide a sound broadcastingservice in respect of an area which includes a Gaeltacht area, theContract Awards Committee shall have particular regard to the con-tinuance and advancement as a spoken language of the Irishlanguage.
(4) In considering the suitability of an applicant for the award of
a broadcasting contract, the Contract Awards Committee shall haveregard to—
(a) the overall quality of the performance of the applicant
with respect to the provision by him or her of a broad-casting service under any broadcasting contract held byhim or her at, or before, the date of the making of theapplication, and
(b) reports of the Compliance Committee.
(5) Where the Contract Awards Committee decides to refuse to
recommend the award of a broadcasting contract to an applicant, theContract Awards Committee shall notify the applicant of—
(a) the reasons for the decision,
(b) the score of the applicant, and
(c) the score of any successful applicant.
(6) In this section “notice” means a notice under section 65(9) .
67.—(1) In this section—
“Committee” means Contract Awards Committee;“fast-track procedure” means a procedure provided for under sub-
section (2) ;
“incumbent” means the holder of a sound broadcasting contract
which is the subject of a notice under section 65(6) .
(2) Where, in the opinion of the Committee, the only response
made in good faith pursuant to a public notice under section 65(6) ,
is received from the incumbent, then the Committee may at itsdiscretion propose to invoke a fast-track procedure under subsec-
tion (6) .
(3) Where the Committee proposes to invoke a fast-track pro-
cedure, it shall by notice published on a website maintained by the
75Pt.6 S.66
Fast-track
application processfor award of soundbroadcastingcontracts.Pt.6 S.67
76[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Authority, and where appropriate in a newspaper circulating in the
area to be served, state its intention to invoke such a procedure.
(4) If a person, other than the incumbent, within 28 days of a
notice published under subsection (3) —
(a) submits in writing that he or she wishes to apply for the
award of a sound broadcasting contract for the area con-cerned, and
(b) deposits such a sum with the Authority as is specified by
the Committee in any notice under subsection (3) , not
exceeding \25,000,
then the Committee shall proceed to—
(i) invite applications for the award of a sound broadcasting
contract for the area concerned under section 65(8) ,o r
(ii) refer the matter to the Authority for direction.
(5) Where, in the opinion of the Committee, an application under
section 65 has been received consequent to a submission under sub-
section (4) then any sum deposited under subsection (4) shall be
refunded in full.
(6) In the event that no written submission and associated deposit
are received under subsection (4) the Committee may—
(a) request the Compliance Committee to prepare a report on
the incumbent’s compliance with the terms of its soundbroadcasting contract and Part 3 ,
(b) invite the incumbent to make a proposal to amend the
terms of his or her sound broadcasting contract, and
(c) suggest to the incumbent possible amendments to the
terms of his or her contract.
(7) A proposal received under subsection (6) must address—
(a) the matters outlined in section 66 , and
(b) such other matters as the Committee may consider
relevant.
(8) On consideration of a proposal received under subsection (6)
the Committee may—
(a) reject the contractual changes proposed by the incumbent
and proceed to invite applications under section 65(8)
from other persons for the area concerned,
(b) refer the matter to the Authority for direction, or
(c) recommend to the Authority, and the Authority shall fol-
low any such recommendation, that the Authority agreethe amended contract terms recommended by the Com-mittee with the incumbent.
(9) The term of any contract extension agreed under subsection
(8)shall not exceed 10 years.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(10) All payments made to the Authority under subsection (4)(b)
and subsequently forfeited by the applicant shall be paid into or dis-posed of for the benefit of the Exchequer in such manner as theMinister for Finance may direct.
68.—(1) The Authority, on the recommendation of the Contract
Awards Committee, may, in any period of 12 months, enter into asound broadcasting contract with an applicant for the provision insuch area as may be specified in the contract of a sound broadcastingservice for a period of—
(a) not more than 30 days (whether consecutive days or
otherwise) in that period of 12 months, or
(b) if the application is for a community sound broadcasting
contract, not more than 100 days (whether consecutivedays or otherwise) in that period of 12 months.
(2) The Authority, on the recommendation of the Contract
Awards Committee, may enter into a sound broadcasting contractwith an applicant for the provision of a low-power sound broadcast-ing service which is intended to serve only such single educationalinstitution, hospital, or other similar establishment as may be speci-fied in the contract.
(3) Section 39(1)(c) does not apply to a contract awarded for the
provision of a sound broadcasting service under this section.
(4) Sections 65 and 66do not apply in the case of a contract
applied for, or awarded, for the provision of a sound broadcastingservice under this section.
69.—(1) Every broadcasting contract may contain such terms and
conditions as the Authority thinks appropriate and specifies in thecontract.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Authority may specify in a broadcasting contract all or any of thefollowing terms or conditions:
(a) the period during which the contract shall continue in
force;
(b) whether the contract may be renewed and, if so, the man-
ner in which, the terms on which, and the period forwhich, the contract may be so renewed;
(c) a condition prohibiting the assignment of the contract or
of any interest in it;
(d) if the broadcasting contractor is a company, a condition
prohibiting any alteration in the Memorandum orArticles of Association of the company or in so much ofthat Memorandum or of those Articles as may be speci-fied or prohibiting any material change in the ownershipof the company;
(e) a condition requiring the broadcasting contractor to
provide the quality, range and type of programmes whichhe or she proposed to offer in his or her application forthe award of the contract;
77Pt.6 S.67
Sound broadcasting
contracts fortemporary orinstitutional soundbroadcastingservices.
Terms and
conditions ofbroadcastingcontract.Pt.6 S.69
78[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(f) a condition requiring the sound broadcasting contractor to
pay to the Authority the amount which the contractorspecified in his or her application.
(3) If a broadcasting contract does not contain a condition of the
type specified in paragraph (c) or(d)ofsubsection (2) , the following
provisions shall have effect:
(a) a broadcasting contract, or any interest in a broadcasting
contract, shall not be assignable, nor shall any alterationbe made in the Memorandum or Articles of Associationof any company which is a broadcasting contractor, norshall there be any material change in the ownership ofsuch a company, without the previous consent in writingof the Authority, and the Authority may, if it considersit reasonable so to do, refuse such consent;
(b) in considering whether to grant its consent to an assign-
ment of a broadcasting contract, a change in the Memor-andum or Articles of Association of a company whichis a broadcasting contractor, or a material change in theownership of such a company, the Authority shall haveregard to the criteria specified in section 66(2) and, where
applicable, section 66(4) .
(4) Every broadcasting contract shall provide that the broadcast-
ing contractor shall provide such information (including copies of hisor her accounts) which the Authority or the Compliance Committeeconsiders it requires in order to enable it carry out its functions underthis Act.
(5) Every broadcasting contract shall be open to inspection by
members of the public at the Authority’s registered office and theAuthority shall, on request made by any person and on payment ofsuch sum (if any) as the Authority may reasonably require, give tothat person a copy of that contract.
(6) In order to avoid the loss of sound programme material inimi-
cal to the preservation of a historical record of Irish culture, heritageand experience and as an initial step towards the development of anintegrated approach to the archiving of programme material pro-duced in the State, every sound broadcasting contract shall containa term or condition requiring the sound broadcasting contractor tomake a recording and to store categories of programme material,which may be inspected by the Authority, for the term of the soundbroadcasting contract and for a period of 6 years thereafter.
(7) The Authority shall, within one year of the passing of this Act,
prescribe a format and categories to be followed by sound broadcast-ing contractors for the purposes of the storing and recording of prog-ramme material as required under subsection (6) .
(8) The Authority may vary the categories and amounts of prog-
ramme material required to be recorded and stored by a soundbroadcasting contractor having regard to the nature and amount ofprogramme material broadcast by the sound broadcasting contractorand any financial burden associated with such recording and storage.
(9) In carrying out its duties under subsections (7) and (8)the
Authority shall have due regard to programme content which:
(a) is in the Irish language,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) relates to Irish culture and life,
(c) concerns Irish music, drama and entertainment,
(d) is news, current affairs or documentary,
(e) is in any other category identified by the Authority and
which the Authority deems is worthy of maintenanceand preservation.
(10) The Authority may store on behalf of a sound broadcasting
contractor or a person who held a sound broadcasting contract anyprogramme material recorded under subsection (6) .
(11) The making of a recording and storage of programme
material in compliance with subsection (6) or(10) is not a contra-
vention of the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000.
(12) The Authority shall report to the Minister on an annual basis
in relation to the performance of its duties under subsections (7) ,(8),
(9)and (10).
(13) Any amount paid to the Authority by a contractor, being an
amount which the contractor specified in his or her application, shallbe paid into or disposed of for the benefit of the Exchequer in suchmanner as the Minister for Finance may direct.
70.—(1) The Authority, on the recommendation of the Contract
Awards Committee, shall enter into a contract (“television prog-ramme service contract”) with a person or persons (“television prog-ramme service contractor”) who shall have the right and duty toestablish and maintain a television programme service and who, sub-ject to section 139 , shall have the right and duty, subject to the terms
of the contract, to establish, maintain and operate television broad-casting transmitters for the purpose of transmitting the televisionprogramme service as a free-to-air service.
(2) The Authority shall ensure that a television programme
service provided by a television programme service contractor underthis section shall in its programming—
(a) be responsive to the interests and concerns of the whole
community, be mindful of the need for understandingand peace within the whole island of Ireland, ensure thatthe programmes reflect the varied elements which makeup the culture of the people of the whole island ofIreland, and have special regard for the elements whichdistinguish that culture and in particular for the Irishlanguage,
(b) uphold the democratic values enshrined in the Consti-
tution, especially those relating to rightful liberty ofexpression,
(c) have regard to the need for the formation of public aware-
ness and understanding of the values and traditions ofcountries other than the State, including in particularthose of other Member States, and
(d) include a reasonable proportion of news and current
affairs programmes.
79Pt.6 S.69
Television
programme servicecontract.Pt.6 S.70
Content provision
contracts.
80[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) A television programme service contractor shall in its pro-
gramming comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs (a) to
(d)ofsubsection (2) .
(4) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with subsection (2)
the Authority shall ensure that a reasonable proportion of the tele-vision programme service—
(a) is produced in the State or in another Member State, and
(b) is devoted to original programme material produced ther-
ein by persons other than the contractor, its subsidiary,its parent or existing broadcasting organisations.
(5) The television programme service contract entered into
between TV3 Television Network Limited trading as TV3 and theBCI under section 17 of the Radio and Television Act 1988 andsection 6 of the Broadcasting Act 1990, if in force immediately beforethe passing of this Act, continues as if entered into under this section.
(6) The Authority shall ensure that any contract entered into by
it under this section and any such contract renewed by it under thisAct, contains a term providing that the expression “independent tele-vision programme”, where used in the contract, has the same mean-ing as it has in section 116 .
71.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , a person shall not supply a com-
pilation of programme material for either of the purposes set out insubsection (2) otherwise than under and in accordance with a content
provision contract.
(2) The purposes for which subsection (1) applies are—
(a) inclusion as part of a multiplex,
(b) the purpose of its being transmitted as a broadcasting
service in the State, part of the State or elsewhere bymeans of an electronic communications network includ-ing a satellite network, a MMD system, a fixed or mobileterrestrial network, a cable television network, an inter-net protocol television network or any other form of elec-tronic communications network.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to such a supply made by—
(a) an excepted person for the purpose of any such arrange-
ments, or
(b) RTE ´, TG4, Houses of the Oireachtas Channel, Irish Film
Channel or the holder of a broadcasting contract for thepurposes of a free-to-air service.
(4) The Authority, on the recommendation of the Contract
Awards Committee, may enter into a contract (“content provisioncontract”) with a person whereby that person may supply a compi-lation of programme material for the purposes referred to in subsec-
tion (2) .
(5) A content provision contract shall include—
(a) a condition requiring the holder of the contract to comply
with any broadcasting codes or rules with respect to the[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
programme material supplied in pursuance of the con-
tract, and
(b) a condition authorising the Compliance Committee to
request the holder of the contract to pay to the Authority,in respect of a failure by the holder to comply with aparticular term or condition of the contract, a sum ofmoney (not exceeding an amount that shall be specifiedin the condition as being the maximum amount that maybe so requested to be so paid) and requiring the holderto comply with such a request.
(6) A content provision contract shall include a condition provid-
ing that, where any of the programme material supplied in pursuanceof the contract—
(a) contravenes Article 22 or 3b of the Council Directive or
the Prohibition of Incitement to Hatred Act 1989, or
(b) constitutes an incitement to commit an offence,
the Authority may, or, if such a supply of programme material has
occurred within 6 months of a previous such supply by the sameperson having occurred, shall, terminate the contract.
(7) The Authority may divide the contracts it may enter into
under this section into different classes by reference to the differentconditions which, in pursuance of its powers under this Act, it mayattach to the contracts and may style each such class of contract bythe addition of such distinguishing words as it considers appropriate.
(8) The Authority may, before it enters into a content provision
contract with a person, require that person to pay a fee to the Auth-ority of such amount as it considers appropriate. If that person failsto pay that fee to the Authority, the Authority shall not enter intothe contract with him or her.
(9) The Authority may specify different fees for particular classes
of content provision contractors.
(10) The amount of any fee paid to the Authority under subsec-
tion (8) may be used by it for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incurred by it in performing its functions generally.
72.—(1) Subject to this section, 2 or more members of a local
community or community of interest may supply a compilation ofprogramme material for the purposes of its being transmitted as abroadcasting service under and in accordance with a MMD systemtransmission licence or by an appropriate network provider referredto in section 77(1) .
(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), the Authority may enter
into a class of content provision contract (“community content pro-vision contract”) with 2 or more members of a local community or acommunity of interest whereby those members may supply a compi-lation of programme material for the purposes referred to in subsec-
tion (1) if it is satisfied that—
(a) those members are representative of, and accountable to,
the community concerned, and
81Pt.6 S.71
Community content
provision contracts.Pt.6 S.72
82[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) the supply of programme material in pursuance of the con-
tract will be effected with the sole objective of—
(i) specifically addressing the interests of, and seeking to
provide a social benefit to, the community con-cerned, and
(ii) achieving a monetary reward of no greater amount
than is reasonably necessary to defray the expensesthat will be incurred in effecting that supply.
(3) The Authority shall not enter into a community content con-
tract save after consultation with the person who it appears to theAuthority will transmit or, as the case may be, will be the subject of arequirement under section 76(4) or77(8) to transmit, the programme
material supplied pursuant to the contract as a broadcasting service.
(4) The Authority shall establish procedures whereby members of
local communities are enabled, at regular intervals, to make sub-missions to the Authority as to what particular contracts ought, intheir opinion, to be entered into under this section and what part-icular terms and conditions ought, in their opinion, to be included insuch contracts and requiring the Authority to furnish, on request, toany such members particulars of any proposals formulated, for thetime being, by the Authority itself with regard to each of thosematters.
(5) Before entering into a community content provision contract,
the Authority shall have regard to any submissions made to it underand in accordance with procedures established under subsection (4)
and which appear to it to be of relevance to that contract.
(6) The Authority shall conduct, or arrange with members of the
local community or community of interest concerned for there to beconducted, a survey, which shall be as comprehensive as is practi-cable, amongst members of that community for the purpose ofascertaining—
(a) the extent to which that community is facilitated in the
active participation by it in the compilation and trans-mission of the programme material supplied pursuant toa community content provision contract,
(b) the extent to which those members view any broadcasting
service on which there is transmitted that programmematerial, and
(c) the opinion of those members with regard to—
(i) the quality of that programme material, and
(ii) whether that material specifically addresses the
interests of their community,
and shall have regard to the results of such a survey in deciding, in
relation to any community content provision contract it proposes toenter into with members of that community next after the conductof that survey, with whom it shall enter into such a contract and thenature of the terms and conditions it may include in that contract.
(7) If the holder of a MMD system transmission licence is
required under section 76(4) , or an appropriate network provider
referred to in section 77(1) is required under subsection (8) of that[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
section, to transmit as a broadcasting service the programme material
supplied pursuant to a community content provision contract, theholder or an appropriate network service provider shall not be—
(a) under any duty to ensure that the material complies with
the terms and conditions of that contract or the require-ments of Part 3 ,
(b) regarded, for the purposes of the law of defamation,
malicious falsehood or any other form of civil liabilityas having, by virtue of such transmission, published thematerial, or
(c) liable in damages, by virtue of such transmission, for any
infringement of copyright, other intellectual propertyrights or other legal rights of any person.
73.—The Authority may, of its own initiative or at the request of
a local community or community of interest, carry out an assessmentof the needs of a community in respect of broadcasting and suchan assessment shall include an ascertainment of the extent to whichproduction facilities, training and resources are available to the com-munity to enable the community to best serve its interests in respectof those needs.
74.—(1) In this section “electronic programme guide” means any
electronic means of providing information to members of the publicin relation to the schedule of programme material the subject of anybroadcasting service and which electronic means is an integral partof the distribution and reception system by which the broadcastingservice is provided.
(2) A person shall not prepare or make available for use an elec-
tronic programme guide otherwise than under and in accordancewith an electronic programme guide contract.
(3) The Authority may enter into a contract (“electronic prog-
ramme guide contract”) with a person whereby that person may pre-pare and make available for use one or more electronic programmeguides.
(4) An electronic programme guide contract shall include a con-
dition requiring the holder of the contract to comply with rules undersection 75 in respect of the electronic programme guide or guides
prepared by him or her under that contract.
(5) An electronic programme guide contract shall include a con-
dition requiring the holder of the contract to ensure that the elec-tronic programme guide or guides prepared under the contract prior-itise within the guide or guides the positioning of each broadcastingservice provided in the State by RTE ´, TG4 and the service provided
under a television programme service contract by the televisionservice programme contractor, where such broadcasting services aremade available on the distribution and reception system, and afurther condition that the electronic programme guide or guides mayeasily be used by a member of the public to access information inrelation to the schedules of programme material the subject of eachof the aforementioned broadcasting services.
(6) A holder of an electronic programme guide contract shall not
design an electronic programme guide in such a way as to result in a
83Pt.6 S.72
Assessment of
community needs inrespect ofbroadcasting.
Electronic
programme guides.Pt.6 S.74
Rules with respect
to programme guidecontracts.
Transmission of
broadcastingservices by MMDsystem.
84[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
user of the guide experiencing difficulty in accessing the programme
material supplied by a broadcasting contractor, a content provisioncontractor or a broadcaster under Part 7 .
(7) If the Authority considers it appropriate to do so in order that
members of the public may keep themselves informed of the choiceof programme material available for viewing on broadcastingservices included as part of a multiplex (within the meaning of section
129) it may invite expressions of interest in the securing of an elec-
tronic programme guide contract.
(8) The Authority may, having examined each of the expressions
of interest received on foot of such an invitation, enter into a prog-ramme guide contract with the person whose proposals for such elec-tronic programme guide or guides would, in its opinion, best servethe needs of the public.
(9) The Authority may give a direction to RTE ´or a multiplex
contractor requiring that RTE ´or the contractor include as part of a
television multiplex an electronic programme guide prepared underan electronic programme guide contract referred to in subsection (8) ,
and RTE ´or the contractor shall comply with the direction.
(10) For the purposes of this section a teletext service shall not
be regarded as an electronic programme guide.
75.—The Authority, after consultation with the Communications
Regulator, may prepare rules with respect to the format in which theinformation in relation to schedules of programme material providedby electronic programme guides may be presented and the makingof the arrangements that are necessary to meet the requirements ofsection 74(5) .
76.—(1) The holder of a licence granted by the Communications
Regulator being a licence that authorises the distribution of prog-ramme material by the means of a MMD system, shall distribute, bythose means—
(a) in case the MMD system used by that holder is, in whole
or in part, an analogue system, the service provided undersection 70 by the television service programme contractor
and which that contractor requests the holder to sodistribute,
(b) in case the MMD system used by that holder is, in whole
or in part, a digital system, each free-to-air service pro-vided by RTE ´and by TG4 and the free-to-air service
provided under section 70 by the television service prog-
ramme contractor and which that body or contractorrequests the holder to so distribute.
(2) If a dispute arises between the holder of a licence referred to
insubsection (1) and a body or contractor referred to in subsection
(1)in relation to the placement by the holder, relative to the place-
ment by him or her of another broadcasting service, on the systemconcerned of a free-to-air service provided by that body or contrac-tor, being a placement made on a MMD system for the purposes ofthe holder’s complying with a request by that body or contractorunder subsection (1) , as the case may be, the dispute shall be referred
to the Authority for its determination and the determination of theAuthority in the matter shall be final.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) The holder of a licence referred to in subsection (1) shall not
impose a charge in relation to the making available to a person ofany service referred to in subsection (1) if he or she imposes a charge
on that person in relation to the making available of any otherservice to that person by means of the MMD system concerned.
(4) Subject to subsection (5) , the Authority may require the
holder of a licence referred to in subsection (1) to distribute as a
broadcasting service, by means of the MMD system concerned, thewhole or part of the programme material supplied under one or morespecified community content provision contracts the holders of whichare members of the local community or community of interest thatis served by the said system and who request the first-mentionedholder to so distribute the whole or, as the case may be, a part ofthat programme material.
(5) Subsection (4) shall not apply if the system used by the holder
of the licence concerned is an analogue MMD system.
(6) A person of whom a requirement is made by the Authority
under subsection (4) shall comply with that requirement.
(7) The holder of a licence referred to in subsection (1) shall not
impose a charge in relation to the making available to a person ofany service referred to in subsection (4) , pursuant to a requirement
made of him or her under that subsection, if he or she imposes acharge on that person in relation to the making available of any otherservice to that person by means of the MMD system concerned.
(8) The Authority shall report to the Minister on an annual basis
in relation to the operation of this section.
77.—(1) ( a) In this Part “appropriate network” means an electronic
communications network provided by a person(“appropriate network provider”) which is used for thedistribution or transmission of broadcasting services tothe public.
(b) For the purposes of this section a multiplex contractor in
relation to multiplexes referred to in section 132(1) ,(2),
(3)and(4)or in section 133 is not an appropriate network
provider by virtue of being a multiplex contractor orassociated activities.
(c) For the purposes of this section a holder of a licence
referred to in section 76(1) , the terms of which authorise
the transmission by means of a MMD system of prog-ramme material, is not an appropriate network providerby virtue of being a licensee or associated activities.
(d) For the purposes of this section a holder of a licence issued
under section 59 or121, the terms of which authorise the
transmission of programme material, is not an appro-priate network provider by virtue of being a licenseeunder that section or associated activities.
(2) Where the Authority is of the view, after carrying out a review
and after consultation with the Communications Regulator, that atype or class of network system, rather than an individual networksystem, is not used by a significant number of end-users as their prin-cipal means of receiving transmissions of programme material, it maypropose to the Minister the full or partial removal of the obligations
85Pt.6 S.76
Must-carry and
must-offerobligations.Pt.6 S.77
86[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
set out in subsections (3), (4) ,(5),(6),(7),(8), (9) and (10) on that
type or class of network system. The Minister may make an order tothat effect.
(3) In the case where the appropriate network is a digital system,
the appropriate network provider shall ensure the re-transmission,by or through his or her appropriate network, of the Houses of theOireachtas Channel and the Irish Film Channel.
(4) An appropriate network provider shall ensure the re-trans-
mission, by or through his or her appropriate network, of each free-to-air television service provided for the time being by RTE ´, TG4
and the free-to-air service provided under section 70 by the television
service programme contractor which that body or contractor requeststhe appropriate network provider to so re-transmit.
(5) If a dispute arises between the appropriate network provider
and RTE ´, TG4 or the television programme service contractor in
relation to the placement by the appropriate network provider, rela-tive to the placement by him or her of another broadcasting service,on the system concerned of a free-to-air service provided by thatbody or contractor, being a placement made on an appropriate net-work for the purposes of the appropriate network provider com-plying with a request by that body or contractor under subsection
(4), the dispute shall be referred to the Authority for its determi-
nation and the determination of the Authority in the matter shallbe final.
(6) An appropriate network provider shall re-transmit each
national sound broadcasting service provided for the time being byRTE´and each sound broadcasting contractor and which RTE ´or the
contractor concerned requests the holder to so re-transmit.
(7) The appropriate network provider shall not impose a charge
or allow a charge to be imposed in relation to the making availableto a person of any service referred to in subsection (3), (4) ,(5)or(6)
if he or she imposes a charge or allows a charge to be imposed onthat person in relation to the making available of any other serviceto that person by means of the appropriate network concerned.
(8) The Authority may require an appropriate network provider
to transmit as a broadcasting service, by means of specified appro-
priate networks (whether analogue or digital) maintained by theappropriate network provider, the whole or part of the programmematerial supplied under one or more specified community contentprovision contracts the holders of which are members of the localcommunity or community of interest that is served by the said appro-priate network and who request the first-mentioned appropriate net-work provider to so transmit the whole or, as the case may be, partof that programme material.
(9) A person of whom a requirement is made by the Authority
under subsection (8) shall comply with that requirement.
(10) An appropriate network provider shall not impose a charge
or allow a charge to be imposed in relation to the making availableto a person of any service referred to in subsection (8) , pursuant to
a requirement made of him or her under that subsection, if he or sheimposes a charge or allows a charge to be imposed on that person inrelation to the making available of any other service to that personby means of the appropriate network concerned.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(11) Without prejudice to the requirements imposed under sub-
section (4) , RTE ´, TG4 and the television service programme contrac-
tor shall ensure that their must-offer services are at all times offeredfor re-transmission (subject to agreement as to fair, reasonable andnon-discriminatory terms of use) by means of any appropriate net-work that is available for reception in an intelligible form bymembers of the public in the whole of or in part of the State.
(12) RTE ´, TG4 and the television service programme contractor
shall ensure that their must-offer services are at all times offered forbroadcast or re-transmission (subject to agreement as to fair, reason-able and non-discriminatory terms of use) by means of every satellitetelevision service.
(13) Arrangements entered into under subsection (12) shall not
result in an additional charge on any subscriber to a satellite tele-vision service by reason of the making available to that subscriber ofany must-offer service by way of the satellite television service.
(14) Subject to the requirements of any contract made under
section 74 any arrangement entered into under subsection (12) shall
ensure that the electronic programme guide by which members ofthe public access the satellite television service shall prioritise thepositioning of the must-offer service for the purposes of that satellitetelevision service and for the purposes of any other satellite tele-vision service which also utilises the same electronic programmeguide for the purposes of making a satellite television service avail-able for reception in an intelligible form by members of the publicin the whole of or in part of the State.
(15) The Authority shall report to the Minister on an annual basis
in relation to the operation of this section.
(16) ( a) An order under subsection (2) shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas by the Minister as soon as maybe after it is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which an order waslaid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) , pass a
resolution annulling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of an order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
(17) In this section—
“must-offer service” means a free-to-air television service provided
for the time being by RTE ´, TG4 and the free-to-air service provided
under section 70 by the television service programme contractor;
“re-transmission” means near-simultaneous, unaltered and
unabridged transmission;
“satellite television service” means a service which consists in or
involves the distribution or transmission of television broadcastingservices from a satellite, such services then offered to the public withthe intention that such services be used by a significant number ofthe persons in the whole or part of the State by whom the broadcastsare received in an intelligible form as their principal means of receiv-ing television programmes.
87Pt.6 S.77Pt.6
Offences ( Part 6 ).
Bodies corporate.
Seals of
corporations.
Appointment of
board.
88[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
78.—(1) A person who contravenes section 71(1) or74(2) commits
an offence.
(2) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\100,000.
PART 7
Public Service Broadcasting
Chapter 1
Public Service Broadcasting Corporations —Common Provisions
79.—Each corporation continues as a body corporate with per-
petual succession and power to sue and be sued and to acquire, holdand dispose of land.
80.—(1) A corporation shall as soon as may be after the passing
of this Act provide itself with a new seal.
(2) The seal of a corporation shall be authenticated by the signa-
ture of the chairperson of the corporation, or some other member ofit authorised by the corporation to act in that behalf, and the signa-ture of an officer of the corporation authorised by the corporationto act in that behalf.
(3) Judicial notice shall be taken of the seal of a corporation, and
every document purporting to be an instrument made by the corpor-ation and to be sealed with the seal (purporting to be authenticatedin accordance with this section) of the corporation shall be receivedin evidence and be deemed to be such instrument without furtherproof unless the contrary is shown.
81.—(1) The number of members of the board of a corporation
shall be 12 in number, of which—
(a) 6 of them shall be appointed by the Government on the
nomination of the Minister,
(b) subject to subsection (2) , 4 of them shall be appointed by
the Government on the nomination of the Minister,
(c) one shall be appointed by the Government following an
election in accordance with section 83 , and
(d) one shall be the director general of the corporation.
(2) Where an appointment is to be made by the Government
under subsection (1)(b) or under that paragraph arising from a vac-
ancy referred to in section 84(12) —[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) the Minister shall inform the Joint Oireachtas Committee
of the proposed appointment,
(b) The Minister in respect of an appointment under subsec-
tion (1)(a) shall provide a statement to the Joint
Oireachtas Committee indicating the relevant experienceand expertise of the persons or person nominated by theMinister for appointment or appointed by the Govern-ment on the nomination of the Minister, and such othermatters as the Minister considers relevant,
(c) the Joint Oireachtas Committee shall within the period of
90 days of being so informed, advise the Minister of thenames of the persons or name of the person it proposesthat the Minister should nominate under subsection
(1)(b) giving reasons, such as relevant experience and
expertise, in relation to the proposed named persons orperson,
(d) the Minister shall have regard to the advice and may
accept the proposed named persons or some of them orthe named person or decide to nominate as he or she seesfit other persons or another person, and
(e) inform the Joint Oireachtas Committee of his or her
decision.
(3) Not less than 5 of the members of the board of a corporation
shall be men and not less than 5 of them shall be women.
(4) The Joint Oireachtas Committee for the purposes of providing
advice to the Minister under subsection (2) may establish a panel, for
such duration, and consisting of such number of persons as the JointOireachtas Committee shall think proper.
(5) Persons placed on a panel established under subsection (4)
shall—
(a) have experience of or have shown capacity in one or more
of the matters stated in section 82(1) ,
(b) in respect of TG4 comply with the requirements of section
82(2) , and
(c) be chosen with a view to representing the public interest
in respect of public service broadcasting matters.
(6) The Joint Oireachtas Committee shall, insofar as is practi-
cable, endeavour to ensure that among the persons placed on a panelunder subsection (4) there is an equitable balance between men
and women.
(7) The Joint Oireachtas Committee shall have sole responsibility
for the selection and placing of candidates on a panel establishedunder subsection (4) .
82.—(1) A person shall not be appointed to be a member of the
board of a corporation unless he or she has experience of or showncapacity in one or more of the following matters—
(a) media affairs,
89Pt.7 S.81
Criteria for board
membership.Pt.7 S.82
Appointment of
staff member.
90[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) public service broadcasting,
(c) broadcast content production,
(d) digital media technologies,
(e) trade union affairs,
(f) business or commercial affairs,
(g) matters pertaining to the development of the Irish
language,
(h) matters pertaining to disability,
(i) arts, music, sport or culture,
(j) science, technology or environmental matters,
(k) legal or regulatory affairs, and
(l) social, educational or community activities or Gaeltacht
affairs,
relevant to the oversight of a public service broadcaster.
(2) A person shall not be appointed to be a member of the board
of TG4 unless he or she is able to communicate proficiently in theIrish language.
(3) Each member of the board of a corporation shall be appointed
for a period not exceeding 5 years.
(4) The Government in setting a term of appointment under sub-
section (3) shall consider the need for continuity of membership of
the board of a corporation.
(5) A member of the board of a corporation whose term of office
expires by the effluxion of time shall be eligible for re-appointment.
(6) A member of the board of a corporation shall not serve more
than 2 consecutive terms of office.
(7) A member of the board of a corporation may at any time
resign his or her office by letter addressed to the Government andthe resignation shall take effect on the date specified therein or uponreceipt of the letter by the Government, whichever is the later.
(8) Subsections (3) to(7)do not apply to the membership of the
director general of the board of a corporation.
83.—(1) The Government shall appoint to be a member of the
board of each corporation one member of staff of the corporationelected to be a staff member of the board in accordance with thissection.
(2) A member of the board of a corporation appointed under this
section shall, subject to this section, be eligible for nomination as acandidate and for election at an election.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) An election shall be held as soon as practicable after the pass-
ing of this Act or such longer period as may be agreed between thecorporation and recognised trade unions and staff associations.
(4) Subsections (5) to(16) apply for the purposes of an election.
(5) ( a) The secretary of a corporation (or a person selected by
him or her after consultation with representatives ofrecognised trade unions or staff associations) shall be thereturning officer for each election of a staff member ofthe board of the corporation.
(b) The returning officer shall not be entitled to be nominated
as, or to nominate, act as agent for or promote theinterests of, a candidate at the election.
(c) The returning officer may authorise any person to exercise
designated functions on his or her behalf and paragraph
(b)applies to any such person.
(6) ( a) A poll shall be conducted where there is more than one
candidate.
(b) Voting shall be by secret ballot and on the basis of pro-
portional representation by means of a single transfer-able vote.
(c) Presiding officers at the poll and polling clerks shall be
appointed by the returning officer.
(d) An election shall be held in accordance with arrangements
made by the returning officer.
(e) The returning officer shall be required to give due notice
of these arrangements to the electorate and to designatepremises as an election office.
(7) ( a) The returning officer shall fix the nomination day and give
notice of the election not later than 4 weeks before thatday.
(b) The nomination day shall be not earlier than 4 weeks after
the day on which eligibility of voters and candidates isdetermined in accordance with subsections (13) and
(14), respectively.
(8) The returning officer may declare a candidate elected if the
number of candidates standing duly nominated does not exceed one.
(9) If the nomination of candidates or any poll is interrupted or
cannot be proceeded with the returning officer may adjourn thenomination or poll for such period as he or she considers appropriateto enable him or her, on its expiration, to proceed with or completethe nomination or poll.
(10) On receipt of a notification from the returning officer of the
name of the candidate elected or declared to be elected under sub-
section (8) , the Government shall, in accordance with this section,
appoint the candidate as a member of the board of the corporation.
(11) The returning officer shall place the remaining candidates in
order of votes credited to each at the last count in which he or shewas involved.
91Pt.7 S.83Pt.7 S.83
Terms and removal.
92[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(12) A corporation shall bear the cost of holding an election
except costs incurred by candidates on their own behalf.
(13) Every employee of a corporation who, on the day specified
by the returning officer and on the day on which the poll is taken—
(a) is not less than 18 years of age, and
(b) has been an employee of the corporation for a continuous
period of not less than one year,
shall be entitled to vote at an election.
(14) ( a) Every employee of a corporation who, on the day specified
by the returning officer under subsection (13) , is not less
than 18 years of age and has been an employee of thecorporation for a continuous period of not less than 18months, shall be eligible to be nominated as a candidateat the election.
(b) A candidate may be nominated by—
(i) a recognised trade union or staff association or jointly
by 2 or more such bodies, or
(ii) a minimum of 20 eligible voters.
(c) Nominations shall be made in the manner specified by the
returning officer.
(d) The returning officer shall rule on the validity of nomi-
nations and his or her decision shall be final.
(15) The returning officer shall prepare and maintain a list of eli-
gible voters and candidates.
(16) The returning officer shall prepare and maintain a list of
recognised trade unions and staff associations for the purposes ofthis section.
(17) In this section “election” means an election held under this
section for the appointment of a staff member to be a staff memberof the board of a corporation.
84.—(1) There shall be paid to members of the board of a corpor-
ation, out of monies at the disposal of the corporation, such remuner-ation (if any) as the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forFinance, from time to time determines.
(2) There shall be paid to members of the board of a corporation,
out of monies at the disposal of the corporation, such allowances forexpenses incurred by them in the performance of their functions asthe Minister, with the consent of the Minister for Finance, from timeto time determines.
(3) Subject to this Act, a member of the board of a corporation
shall hold office on such terms (other than the payment of remuner-ation and allowances for expenses) as the Minister, with the consentof the Minister for Finance, from time to time determines.
(4) The Minister shall cause a statement in writing specifying the
expertise or experience, terms of office and remuneration of the[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
members of a corporation to be laid before both Houses of the
Oireachtas and published in the Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(5) A member of the board of a corporation may at any time be
removed from membership of the board of the corporation by theGovernment if, in the Government’s opinion, the member hasbecome incapable through ill-health of performing his or her func-tions, or has committed stated misbehaviour, or his or her removalappears to the Government to be necessary for the effective per-formance by the corporation of its functions, and only if, resolutionsare passed by each House of the Oireachtas calling for his or herremoval.
(6) A member of the board of a corporation shall cease to be and
shall be disqualified from being a member of the corporation wheresuch member—
(a) is adjudicated a bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with creditors,
(c) on conviction on indictment by a court of competent juris-
diction is sentenced to a term of imprisonment,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty, or
(e) is disqualified or restricted from being a director of any
company.
(7) A member of staff of a corporation, who is appointed to serve
on the board of the corporation or the director general of the corpor-ation, shall cease to be a member of the board of the corporation onthe cessation of his or her contract of service with the corporation.
(8) Where a member of the board of a corporation fails—
(a) for a consecutive period of 6 months, to attend a meeting
of the corporation, unless the member demonstrates tothe Minister’s satisfaction that the failure to attend wasdue to illness, or
(b) to comply with the requirements of section 93 ,o r
(c) to make a declaration in accordance with the requirements
of section 17 of the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995,
the Minister may with the consent of the Government by order
remove the member from office.
(9) ( a) An order made under subsection (8) shall be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable afterit is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which an order was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph (a) , pass a resolution annul-
ling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of an order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
93Pt.7 S.84Pt.7 S.84
Chairperson.
94[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(10) If a member of the board of a corporation appointed by the
Government, on the nomination of the Minister under section
81(1)(a) or following an election under section 83 , dies, resigns,
becomes disqualified or is removed from office or for any otherreason ceases to be a member of the board of the corporation, theGovernment on the nomination of the Minister, may appoint a per-son to be a member of the board of the corporation to fill the casualvacancy so occasioned and the person so appointed shall beappointed for the unexpired period of the term of membership of,and in the same manner as, the member of the board of the corpor-ation appointed by the Government, on the nomination of the Mini-ster or following an election under section 83 , who occasioned the
casual vacancy.
(11) In choosing a person to fill a casual vacancy occasioned by
the cessation of membership of a member appointed by Governmentfollowing an election under section 83 , the Government shall select
the next eligible candidate, if any, under section 83(11) . Where 2 or
more candidates are credited with an equal number of votes, theGovernment shall select one of them by lot.
(12) If a member of the board of a corporation appointed by the
Government on the nomination of the Minister under paragraph (b)
ofsection 81(1) dies, resigns, becomes disqualified or is removed
from office or for any other reason ceases to be a member of theboard of the corporation, the Government on the nomination of theMinister, the Minister having regard to the advice of the JointOireachtas Committee, may appoint a person to be a member of theboard of the corporation to fill the casual vacancy so occasioned andthe person so appointed shall be appointed for the unexpired periodof the term of membership of, and in the same manner as, themember of the board of the corporation appointed by the Govern-ment on the nomination of the Minister under paragraph (b) of
section 81(1) , who occasioned the casual vacancy.
85.—(1) The Government shall from time to time as occasion
requires appoint, on the nomination of the Minister, a member ofthe board of a corporation to be chairperson of it.
(2) A chairperson of a corporation shall, unless he or she sooner
dies, resigns the office of chairperson or ceases to be chairpersonunder subsection (4) , hold office until the expiration of his or her
period of office as a member of the board of the corporation.
(3) A chairperson of a corporation may at any time resign his or
her office as chairperson by letter sent to the Government and theresignation shall, unless it is previously withdrawn in writing, takeeffect at the commencement of the meeting of the corporation heldnext after the corporation has been informed by the Government ofthe resignation.
(4) Where a chairperson of a corporation ceases during his or her
term of office as chairperson to be a member of the corporation heor she shall also cease to be chairperson of the corporation.
(5) A member of staff of a corporation appointed by the Govern-
ment to membership of the board of the corporation or a directorgeneral of a corporation shall not be appointed as chairperson ofthe corporation.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
86.—(1) Where a member of the board of a corporation is—
(a) nominated as a candidate for election to the European
Parliament, either House of the Oireachtas, or as amember of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) elected as a member of either House of the Oireachtas or
the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to Part XIII of the Second Schedule to
the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 as havingbeen elected to that Parliament to fill a vacancy,
he or she thereupon ceases to be a member of the corporation.
(2) Where the person who is the director general or a member of
the staff of a corporation is—
(a) nominated as a candidate for election to the European
Parliament, either House of the Oireachtas, or as amember of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) elected as a member of either House of the Oireachtas or
the European Parliament, or
(c) regarded pursuant to Part XIII of the Second Schedule to
the European Parliament Elections Act 1997 as havingbeen elected to that Parliament to fill a vacancy,
he or she shall thereupon stand seconded from employment by the
corporation and shall not be paid by, or be entitled to receive from,the corporation any remuneration or allowances in respect of theperiod commencing on such nomination or election, or when he orshe is so regarded as having been elected as the case may be, andending when such person ceases to be a member of either suchHouse or that Parliament.
(3) A person who is for the time being entitled under the Standing
Orders of either House of the Oireachtas to sit therein or who is amember of the European Parliament, shall, while so entitled or sucha member, be disqualified from becoming a member of the board ofa corporation or the director general or a member of the staff ofa corporation.
(4) A person who is appointed a member of the Authority, the
Contract Awards Committee or the Compliance Committee shall bedisqualified from becoming or ceases to be a member of the boardof a corporation or a director general or a member of staff of a cor-poration.
(5) A person who holds employment, save for educational or per-
forming creative work, or has an interest in an undertaking holdinga contract under this Act, shall be disqualified from becoming orceases to be a member of the board of a corporation.
(6) A person who holds employment in RTE ´shall be disqualified
from becoming or ceases to be a member of the board of TG4.
(7) A person who holds employment in TG4 shall be disqualified
from becoming or ceases to be a member of the board of RTE ´.
(8) A person who holds membership of the board of RTE ´shall
be disqualified from becoming or ceases to be a member of the boardof TG4.
95Pt.7
Exclusions from
board membership.Pt.7 S.86
Duties of board
members.
Meetings.
96[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(9) A person who holds membership of the board of TG4 shall
be disqualified from becoming or ceases to be a member of the boardof RTE ´.
(10) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) , that
subsection shall be read as prohibiting, inter alia , the reckoning of a
period mentioned in that subsection as service with the corporationfor the purposes of any superannuation benefits.
87.—Subject to the requirements of this Act every member of the
board of a corporation shall perform his or her functions in such amanner as to—
(a) represent the interests of viewers and listeners,
(b) ensure that the activities of the corporation in pursuance
of its objectives as set out in section 114(1) or118(1) are
performed efficiently and effectively,
(c) ensure that the gathering and presentation by the corpor-
ation of news and current affairs is accurate and impar-tial, and
(d) safeguard the independence of the corporation, as regards,
the conception, content and production of programmes,the editing and presentation of news and current affairsprogrammes and the definition of programme schedulesfrom State, political and commercial influences.
88.—(1) The board of a corporation shall hold such and so many
meetings as may be necessary for the due performance of itsfunctions.
(2) At a meeting of the board of a corporation—
(a) the chairperson of the board of a corporation shall, if
present, be chairperson of the meeting, and
(b) if and so long as the chairperson of the board of a corpor-
ation is not present or if the office of chairperson is vac-ant, the members of the board of a corporation who arepresent shall choose one of their number to be chair-person of the meeting.
(3) Every question at a meeting of the board of a corporation
shall be determined by a majority of the votes of the members of theboard present and voting on the question, and in the case of an equaldivision of votes, the chairperson of the meeting shall have a secondor casting vote.
(4) The board of a corporation may act notwithstanding one or
more vacancies among its members.
(5) Subject to this Part, the board of a corporation shall regulate
its procedure and practice by rules made under this section.
(6) The quorum for a meeting of the board of a corporation shall
be 7.
(7) Subject to any rule made under subsection (5) meetings of the
board of a corporation shall be capable of being held by telephone[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
or other suitable electronic means whereby all the members of the
board can hear and be heard.
(8) The board of a corporation may delegate any of its functions
to a subcommittee of the board of the corporation subject to suchconditions as the board of the corporation considers appropriate.
89.—(1) A corporation shall from time to time appoint a person
to be the chief executive officer of the corporation and who shallbe known, and is in this Part referred to, as, in the Irish language,ardstiu ´rtho´ir or, in the English language, director general.
(2) A director general shall—
(a) carry on and manage, and control generally, the admini-
stration of the corporation,
(b) act as editor-in-chief in respect of content published by the
corporation in pursuance of its objects under this Act,and
(c) perform such other functions (if any) as may be deter-
mined by the board of the corporation.
(3) The consent of the Government is necessary before a corpor-
ation appoints or removes the director general of the corporation, oralters his or her remuneration or his or her terms and conditions ofholding office.
(4) The person who, immediately before the passing of this Act,
was the director general of Radio Telefı ´sE´ireann, continues as direc-
tor general of RTE ´.
(5) The person who, immediately before the passing of this Act,
was the chief executive officer of TG4, continues as director generalof TG4.
(6) A director general shall not hold any other office or employ-
ment or carry on any business without the consent of the board ofthe corporation.
(7) A director general shall furnish the board of the corporation
with such information (including financial information) in relation tothe performance of his or her functions as the board of the corpor-ation may from time to time require.
(8) The functions of a director general may be performed in his
or her absence or when the position of director general is vacant bysuch member of the staff of the corporation as may, from time totime, be designated for that purpose by the board of the corporation.
(9) A director general shall, for the duration of his or her appoint-
ment, serve as an ex officio member of the board of his or her cor-
poration.
90.—(1) A corporation shall, as well as appointing a director
general, appoint such and so many persons to be members of thestaff of the corporation as it may, from time to time, determine but,subject to subsection (2) , a person shall not be appointed under this
section to be a member of staff of the corporation unless he or shehas been selected by means of a public competition.
97Pt.7 S.88
Director general.
Staff.Pt.7 S.90
Superannuation.
98[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) The requirement under subsection (1) of being selected by
means of a public competition does not apply in relation to:
(a) an appointment consisting of the promotion of a person
who is already a member of staff of the corporation,
(b) an office for which, in the opinion of the corporation,
specialised qualifications not commonly held arerequired, or
(c) an office to which appointments are made for limited
periods only, being periods not exceeding 2 years.
(3) A member of staff of a corporation shall hold his or her
employment on such terms and conditions as the corporation fromtime to time determines.
(4) A corporation may perform any of its functions through or by
any of its members of staff duly authorised by the corporation inthat behalf.
91.—(1) A corporation, with the approval of the Minister and the
consent of the Minister for Finance, shall make a scheme or schemesfor the granting of superannuation benefits to or in respect of themembers of staff, including the director general, of the corporation.
(2) A superannuation scheme shall fix the time and conditions of
retirement of all persons to or in respect of whom superannuationbenefits are payable under the scheme or schemes and differenttimes and conditions may be fixed in respect of different classes ofpersons.
(3) A corporation may, with the approval of the Minister and the
consent of the Minister for Finance, make a scheme amending orrevoking a superannuation scheme including a scheme under thissection.
(4) A superannuation scheme submitted by the corporation under
this section shall, if approved by the Minister with the consent of theMinister for Finance, be carried out by the corporation in accordancewith its terms.
(5) Each superannuation scheme shall include a provision for
appeals from a decision relating to a superannuation benefit underthe scheme.
(6) No superannuation benefits shall be granted by the corpor-
ation to or in respect of a person on ceasing to be director generalor a member of the staff of the corporation otherwise than—
(a) in accordance with a superannuation scheme, or
(b) with the consent of the Minister and the Minister for
Finance.
(7) Disbursement of superannuation benefits which may be
granted to or in respect of persons who, immediately before theestablishment of Radio E ´ireann, were officers and servants of the
Minister, shall not be on less favourable conditions than would applyif the benefits referred to had continued to be paid out of moniesprovided by the Oireachtas.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(8) The Minister for Finance shall make such contribution as may,
with his or her consent, be specified in a scheme or schemes underthis section towards the superannuation benefits related to reckon-able service given before the establishment day of Radio E ´ireann
which may be granted to or in respect of persons who, immediatelybefore that day, were officers and servants of the Minister, and suchscheme or schemes shall, with the like consent, fix the manner andtimes of the payment of such contribution.
(9) Monies required to be paid by the Minister for Finance under
this section shall be advanced out of the Central Fund or the growingproduce of it.
(10) ( a) A superannuation scheme (including an amendment of it)
shall be laid before each House of the Oireachtas by theMinister as soon as may be after it is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a schemewas laid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) , annul
the scheme.
(c) The annulment of a scheme under paragraph (b) takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done underthe scheme before the passing of the resolution.
(11) In this section “superannuation scheme” means a scheme
under this section.
92.—(1) In this section “Committee” means a Committee
appointed by either House of the Oireachtas or jointly by bothHouses of the Oireachtas (other than the Committee on Members’Interests of Da ´il E´ireann or the Committee on Members’ Interests
of Seanad E ´ireann) or a subcommittee of such a Committee.
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , a director general shall, at the
request in writing of a Committee, attend before it to give accountfor the general administration of his or her corporation.
(3) Subject to subsection (4) , the chairperson of a corporation
shall, at the request in writing of a Committee, attend before it torepresent the views of the board of his or her corporation.
(4) A director general or chairperson shall not be required to give
account for, or represent the views of the board of his or her corpor-ation in respect of, any matter which is or has been or may at afuture time be the subject of proceedings before a court or tribunalin the State.
(5) Where a director general or chairperson is of the opinion that
a matter in respect of which he or she is requested to give an accountfor, or represent the views of the board of the corporation, is amatter to which subsection (4) applies, he or she shall inform the
Committee of that opinion and the reasons for the opinion and,unless the information is conveyed to the Committee at a time whenthe director general or chairperson is before it, the information shallbe so conveyed in writing.
(6) Where the director general or chairperson has informed a
Committee of his or her opinion in accordance with subsection (5)
and the Committee does not withdraw the request referred to in
99Pt.7 S.91
Accountability of
director general andchairperson toOireachtasCommittees.Pt.7 S.92
Disclosure by
members ofcorporation ofcertain interests.
100[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
subsection (2) orsubsection (3) in so far as it relates to a matter the
subject of that opinion—
(a) the director general or chairperson may, not later than 21
days after being informed by the Committee of itsdecision not to do so, apply to the High Court in a sum-mary manner for determination of the question whetherthe matter is one to which subsection (4) applies, or
(b) the chairperson of the Committee may, on behalf of the
Committee, make such an application,
and the High Court may determine the matter.
(7) Pending the determination of an application under subsection
(6), the director general or chairperson shall not attend before the
Committee to give account for, or represent the views of the boardof the corporation in respect of, the matter the subject of theapplication.
(8) If the High Court determines that the matter concerned is one
to which subsection (4) applies, the Committee shall withdraw the
request referred to in subsection (2) orsubsection (3) , but if the High
Court determines that subsection (4) does not apply, the director
general or chairperson shall attend before the Committee to giveaccount for, or represent the views of the board of the corporationin respect of, the matter.
93.—(1) A member of the board of a corporation who has—
(a) any interest in any body or concerns with which the cor-
poration has made a contract or proposes to make a con-tract, or
(b) any interest in any contract which the corporation has
made or proposes to make,
shall disclose to the board of the corporation the fact of such interest
and the nature of it and shall not be present at any deliberation ordecision of the board of the corporation relating to the contract.
(2) Where at a meeting of a board of a corporation any of the
following matters arise, namely—
(a) an arrangement to which the corporation is a party or a
proposed such arrangement, or
(b) a contract or other agreement with the corporation or a
proposed such contract or other agreement,
then, any member of the board of the corporation present at the
meeting who otherwise than in his or her capacity as such a memberhas an interest in the matter shall—
(i) at the meeting disclose to the board of the corporation the
fact of such interest and the nature of it,
(ii) neither influence nor seek to influence a decision to be
made in relation to the matter,
(iii) absent himself or herself from the meeting or that part of
the meeting during which the matter is discussed,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(iv) take no part in any deliberation of the board of the corpor-
ation relating to the matter, and
(v) not vote on a decision relating to the matter.
(3) Where an interest is disclosed under this section, the disclos-
ure shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting concerned and,for so long as the matter to which the disclosure relates is beingconsidered or discussed by the meeting, the member of the board bywhom the disclosure is made shall not be counted in the quorum forthe meeting.
(4) Where at a meeting of a board of a corporation a question
arises as to whether or not a course of conduct, if pursued by amember of the board of the corporation, would constitute a failureby him or her to comply with the requirements of subsection (2) , the
question may be determined by the board of the corporation, whosedecision shall be final, and where such a question is so determined,particulars of the determination shall be recorded in the minutes ofthe meeting.
(5) For the purposes of this section and section 94 a person shall
not be regarded as having an interest in any matter by reason onlyof an interest of that person, or of any company in which he or shehas an interest, which is so remote or insignificant that it cannotreasonably be regarded as likely to influence a person in considering,discussing or in voting on, any question relating to the matter, or inperforming any function in relation to that matter.
94.—(1) Where a member of the staff of a corporation or a
member of the staff or a director of a subsidiary or a contractor forservices, in a category specified before engagement by the corpor-ation, has an interest, otherwise than in his or her capacity as such, inany contract, agreement or arrangement, or any proposed contract,agreement or arrangement, to which the corporation is or is pro-posed to be a party, that person—
(a) shall disclose to the board of the corporation his or her
interest and the nature of it,
(b) shall take no part in the negotiation of the contract, agree-
ment or arrangement or in any deliberation by membersof the board of the corporation or members of the staff ofthe corporation or contractors for services in a categoryspecified before engagement by the corporation inrelation to it,
(c) shall not influence or seek to influence a decision to be
made in the matter, and
(d) shall not make any recommendation in relation to the con-
tract, agreement or arrangement.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person as regards a contract
or proposed contract of employment of that person as a member ofthe staff of the corporation or as regards a contract or proposedcontract for services of that person as a contractor for services tothe corporation.
(3) Where a person to whom subsection (1) applies fails to comply
with a requirement of this section, the corporation concerned shall
101Pt.7 S.93
Disclosure by staff
and contractors forservices of certaininterests.Pt.7 S.94
Code of conduct.
Audience council.
102[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
decide the appropriate action (including removal from office or
termination of contract) to be taken.
(4) In this section ‘‘member of staff’’ includes the director general.(5) In this section and sections 95 ,104 and 116, “subsidiary”
means a subsidiary of a corporation.
95.—(1) A corporation shall, as soon as may be, draw up and
adopt a code of conduct in respect of controls on interests and ethicalbehaviour to apply to each member of the board, member of staff,adviser, member of an advisory committee and member of an audi-ence council of the corporation or a subsidiary of the corporation.
(2) A corporation shall, as soon as may be, draw up a code of
conduct in respect of controls on interests and ethical behaviour toapply to such categories of contractors for services as the corporationmay specify before engagement.
(3) A corporation shall publish on a website maintained by the
corporation any code of conduct drawn up under subsections (1)
and (2).
96.—(1) A corporation shall establish for the purposes of this
section, a committee, which committee shall be known, and is in thissection referred to, as an audience council.
(2) An audience council shall consist of 15 members appointed by
its corporation.
(3) The members of the board of a corporation shall appoint one
of their number to serve as a member of its audience council.
(4) In appointing the members of its audience council, a corpor-
ation shall endeavour to ensure that the audience council is represen-tative of the viewing and listening public and, in particular, of Gael-tacht communities and persons with a sight or hearing disability.
(5) In appointing the members of its audience council TG4 shall
endeavour to ensure that the members of the audience council areable to communicate proficiently in the Irish language.
(6) A corporation shall from time to time appoint, as occasion
requires, a member of its audience council to be chairperson of it.
(7) The membership of an audience council shall be appointed for
such periods, not exceeding 5 years, as the corporation may think fitand a member of the audience council appointed for a period of lessthan 5 years shall be eligible for re-appointment for the remainderof the period of 5 years from the beginning of his or her appointment,or for any shorter period.
(8) A member of an audience council may at any time, by notice
in writing to the corporation, resign his or her membership. Themembership of any member of the audience council may at any timebe terminated by notice in writing given to him or her by the cor-poration.
(9) A corporation shall give to its audience council the use of
such resources and information as the council requires for the properperformance of its functions.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(10) The principal function of an audience council shall be to rep-
resent to the board of its corporation the views and interests of thegeneral public with regard to public service broadcasting by the cor-poration.
(11) An audience council may require its corporation to conduct,
or arrange to be conducted, as far as is reasonably practicable, asurvey of children and young persons, for the purpose of ascertainingthe views and interests of children and young persons in respect ofpublic service broadcasting by the corporation.
(12) An audience council may require its corporation to conduct,
or arrange to be conducted, as far as is reasonably practicable, asurvey of elderly persons, for the purpose of ascertaining the viewsand interests of elderly persons in respect of public service broadcast-ing by the corporation.
(13) In order to exercise its function under subsection (10) ,a n
audience council may—
(a) hold public meetings, and
(b) require that its corporation provide the equivalent of up
to one hour of television programme material and inrespect of RTE ´one hour of sound broadcasting prog-
ramme material in each year, and that the corporationshall broadcast same, at such times as are agreed betweenthe corporation and the audience council.
(14) The quorum for a meeting of an audience council shall be 8.(15) Subject to this section an audience council shall have the
power to regulate its own procedure and practice by rules madeunder this section.
(16) An audience council shall, not later than 30 June in each
year, make an annual report to the Minister, the board of its corpor-ation and the Authority, of its proceedings during the preceding fin-ancial year. An audience council may, and if requested to do so bythe Minister shall, make special reports to the Minister during anyyear.
(17) At least once in each year the director general of the corpor-
ation concerned shall meet with the audience council of the cor-poration.
(18) At least once in each year an audience council shall meet
with the board of its corporation.
(19) A corporation may pay to each member of its audience
council such out-of-pocket expenses as such member may reasonablyincur in the performance of his or her functions.
97.—(1) A corporation may establish advisory committees to
advise and assist it in the performance of its functions.
(2) Where advisory committees include members other than
members of the board of the corporation or staff of the corporation,such members may be paid such remuneration (if any) and allow-ances for expenses as the corporation considers reasonable, subjectto the consent of the Minister and the Minister for Finance.
103Pt.7 S.96
Advisory
committees.Pt.7 S.97
Independence.
Statement of
strategy.
Sectoral impact
assessments byAuthority.
Public service
statement.
104[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) A corporation may regulate the procedure of its advisory com-
mittees, but subject to such regulation, an advisory committee mayregulate its own procedure.
(4) A corporation and its director general shall have regard to,
but shall not be bound by, the advice of any advisory committeeunder this section.
98.—Subject to the requirements of this Act, a corporation shall
be independent in the pursuance of its objects.
99.—(1) As soon as may be, but not later than 6 months after the
passing of this Act, and every 5 years thereafter, a corporation shallprepare and present to the Minister, in such format as shall beapproved by the Minister, a statement of strategy.
(2) A statement of strategy prepared under subsection (1) shall
set out the strategy of the board of the corporation for achieving itsobjects under this Act during the period to which the statementrelates, having regard to resources available to the corporation.
(3) The Minister shall, as soon as may be, after a statement of
strategy or any revision to it under this section has been presentedto him or her, cause a copy or a summary of it to be laid before eachHouse of the Oireachtas.
100.—(1) The Authority shall, within 3 months of receiving a writ-
ten request for advice from the Minister in respect of the sectoralimpact of a proposal under this Part, prepare and submit such adviceto the Minister.
(2) The Authority, in advising the Minister on the sectoral impact
of a proposal under this Part, shall consider the following matters—
(a) the extent to which the proposal impacts on—
(i) the availability, choice, quality and accessibility of
services for audiences, and
(ii) existing sectoral services,
(b) the impact of the proposal on sectoral development, inno-
vation and investment,
(c) the impact of the proposal on related markets, and
(d) such matters as the Authority may decide.
(3) In reviewing the sectoral impact of a proposal under this Part,
the Authority shall consider such impacts as may arise within a 5year period of the receipt of a written request for advice from theMinister under subsection (1) .
101.—(1) A corporation, following a public consultation, shall
prepare, not later than 12 months after the passing of this Act, andevery 5 years thereafter, or as required by the Minister, a publicservice statement setting out the principles to be observed, andactivities to be undertaken by the corporation in order to fulfil itspublic service objects.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) A corporation shall submit a public service statement pre-
pared under subsection (1) to the Minister.
(3) The Minister, having consulted with the Authority, and having
reviewed a public service statement received from the corporationunder subsection (2) against its public service objects, may grant his
or her consent to the public service statement.
(4) The Minister shall on the grant of his or her consent to a
public service statement, or any revision to it, cause a copy of thepublic service statement to be laid before each House of theOireachtas.
102.—(1) A corporation shall, by 31 January in each year, prepare
an annual statement of performance commitments, in accordancewith —
(a) its objects,
(b) any extant statement of strategy prepared under section
99, and
(c) any extant public service statement prepared under
section 101 ,
and including the activities to which the corporation intends to com-
mit in that financial year and associated performance indicators.
(2) An annual statement of performance commitments prepared
by a corporation under subsection (1), shall address, inter alia —
(a) original children’s programming, commissioned or pro-
duced by the corporation, relevant to the social and cul-tural needs and interests of children in Ireland andincluding animation and children’s programming in theIrish language, to be broadcast by the corporation,
(b) Irish language programming to be broadcast by the cor-
poration,
(c) science and technology programming to be broadcast by
the corporation,
(d) magazines and books to be prepared, published and dis-
tributed in pursuance of the corporation’s public serviceobjects, and
(e) the recorded audio material to be compiled, published and
distributed in pursuance of the corporation’s publicservice objects.
(3) As soon as may be after 31 January in each year a corporation
shall submit to the Minister and the Authority an annual statementof performance commitments prepared under subsection (1) and,
having consulted with the Minister and the Authority, shall publishthe statement, or a summary of it, as soon as practicable, thereafter.
(4) A corporation shall by 31 March in each year submit to the
Minister and the Authority a report on the fulfilment or otherwiseof any commitments made in a statement prepared under subsection
(1)for the previous financial year and an explanation of any differ-
ence arising.
105Pt.7 S.101
Annual statement
of performancecommitments.Pt.7 S.102
Ministerial consent
for new servicesand variations inchannels.
106[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(5) A corporation shall include within a report required under
section 110 a report on the fulfilment or otherwise of any commit-
ments published under subsection (3) for the period concerned and
an explanation of any difference arising.
103.—(1) A corporation may, with the consent of the Minister,
pursue the objects in paragraphs (g) and (h)ofsection 114(1) or
paragraphs (g) and (h)ofsection 118(1) , as the case may be.
(2) A corporation may, with the consent of the Minister, vary the
number of television or sound broadcasting channels it operates.
(3) A corporation may, with the consent of the Minister, under-
take ancillary services.
(4) Where the Minister proposes to give his or her consent under
this section, the Minister shall—
(a) consult with the corporation concerned and such other
persons as he or she considers appropriate,
(b) consult with the Authority as to the sectoral impact of a
proposal under this section,
(c) consider the public value of such proposal, and
(d) publish in such manner as he or she considers appropriate
a statement outlining the consultations that have beencarried out under paragraphs (a) and (b)and indicate a
place at which any document given to the Minister by aperson referred to in paragraph (a) or(b)in the course of
consultations under those paragraphs may be inspected.
(5) A person referred to in paragraphs (a) or(b)ofsubsection (4)
may, on giving a document to the Minister for the purposes of sub-
section (4) , request the Minister to omit from documents made avail-
able for public inspection under paragraph (d) ofsubsection (4) a
document or part of a document which the person regards as com-mercially sensitive.
(6) The Minister may, if satisfied that the information contained
in a document or part of a document is commercially sensitive andthat its disclosure is not necessary for the purposes of public under-standing of a decision made under subsection (4) , omit the document
or part of a document from the documents made available for publicinspection under paragraph (d) ofsubsection (4) .
(7) For the purposes of this section, information is commercially
sensitive if its disclosure could reasonably be expected to—
(a) materially prejudice the commercial interests of the person
who provided that information to the Minister, or of agroup or class of persons to which that person belongs, or
(b) prejudice the competitive position of a person in the con-
duct of the person’s business.
(8) The Minister, in deciding on the public value of a proposal
under this section shall consider the following matters—
(a) the importance of the proposal in respect of the pursuance
of the public service objects of the corporation,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) the compatibility of the proposal with the Council
Directive and recommendations of the Council of Europein respect of public service broadcasting,
(c) the costs and revenues associated with the proposal and
any impact on existing public service provision,
(d) the extent to which the proposal contributes to meeting
the democratic, cultural, linguistic, educational, and socialneeds of Irish society, of individual groups within Irishsociety, and of Irish communities outside of the islandof Ireland,
(e) the extent to which the proposed service will be accessible
by the public,
(f) the extent to which the proposed service will reach under-
served audiences,
(g) the contribution of the proposed service or activity to rais-
ing the level of familiarity of the general public, or ofindividual groups within Irish society, with new forms ofservices and technologies,
(h) the contribution of the proposal to media plurality, and
(i) such matters as the Minister may decide.
(9) The Minister may attach to any consent granted under this
section such particular terms or conditions as he or she considersappropriate in the circumstances.
(10) The requirements of subsection (2) shall not apply to the
establishment by a corporation of a television or sound broadcastingchannel for a period of not more than 30 days (whether consecutivedays or otherwise) in any period of 12 months.
(11) In this section “ancillary services” means the provision by a
corporation of services, which—
(a) are ancillary to the public service objects of the cor-
poration,
(b) the corporation has not engaged in a significant manner in
the previous 5 years,
(c) require expenditure by the corporation in excess of \5 mil-
lion in each year, and
(d) for which the corporation proposes to use funding received
by the corporation under section 123 ,
but does not include the provision by a corporation of a service in
pursuance of paragraphs (d) ,(f)and (i)ofsection 114(1) and para-
graphs (d) and (f)ofsection 118(1) .
104.—(1) A corporation may, in pursuance of its objects under
this Act, with the consent of the Minister and the Minister for Fin-ance, the Minister having consulted with the Authority, acquire,form, establish and dispose of one or more subsidiaries.
107Pt.7 S.103
Establishment of
subsidiaries andjoint ventures.Pt.7 S.104
Duty of corporation
with respect to itsrevenue.
Advertisements.
108[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) A corporation or a subsidiary of it may, either by itself or with
another person, with the consent of the Minister and the Ministerfor Finance, the Minister having consulted with the Authority, pro-mote or take part in the formation or establishment of a company,and enter into joint ventures or partnerships in pursuance of itsobjects under this Act.
(3) A corporation may, with the consent of the Minister and the
Minister for Finance, the Minister having consulted with the Auth-ority, acquire, hold and dispose of shares or other interests in a com-pany and become a member of a company.
(4) The memorandum and articles of association of a subsidiary
shall be in such form as may be determined by the corporation withthe consent of the Minister and the Minister for Finance.
(5) The Minister may attach to any consent granted under this
section particular terms or conditions as he or she considers appro-priate in the circumstances.
105.—It is the duty of a corporation so to conduct its affairs as to
secure that its revenue is at the earliest possible date, and thereaftercontinues to be, at least sufficient—
(a) to meet all sums properly chargeable to current account,
and
(b) to make suitable provision with respect to capital
expenditure.
106.—(1) A corporation may broadcast advertisements, broadcast
acknowledgements of sponsorship, may fix charges and conditionsfor such broadcasts and, in fixing the charges, may provide for differ-ent circumstances and for additional special charges to be made inspecial cases.
(2) A corporation may reject any advertisement presented for
broadcast in whole or in part.
(3) Subject to the requirements of section 41(2) , a corporation in
providing a broadcasting service under this Part shall, subject to theapproval of the Minister following consultation with the Authority,fix—
(a) the total daily time for broadcasting advertisements, and
(b) the maximum period given to advertisements in any hour.
(4) The Minister, if so requested by the Referendum Commission
following consultation by the Referendum Commission with a cor-poration and consideration of any proposals of the corporation forbroadcasts in connection with the referendum that it communicatesto the Referendum Commission, shall direct the corporation in writ-ing to allocate broadcasting time to facilitate the Referendum Com-mission in performing its functions, and the corporation shall complywith a direction under this subsection.
(5) Charges and conditions referred to in subsection (1) may be
fixed subject to variations benefiting advertisers who use the Irishlanguage in their advertisements.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(6) A power under this section to fix charges and conditions shall
be read as including a power to cancel or vary any charges or con-ditions fixed under such power and, where charges or conditions arecancelled, to fix other charges or conditions in lieu of those cancelled.
(7) In this section references to advertisements shall be read as
including references to teleshopping material and to advertisingmatter in sponsored programmes, that is to say, programmes sup-plied for advertising purposes by or on behalf of an advertiser.
107.—(1) RTE ´may, for the purpose of providing for current or
capital expenditure, from time to time, borrow money (whether onthe security of the assets of the corporation or otherwise), notexceeding in the aggregate \100,000,000 without requiring the con-
sent of the Minister and the Minister for Finance.
(2) TG4 may, for the purpose of providing for current or capital
expenditure, from time to time, borrow money (whether on thesecurity of the assets of the corporation or otherwise), not exceedingin the aggregate \10,000,000 without requiring the consent of the
Minister and the Minister for Finance.
(3) A corporation may, with the consent of the Minister and the
Minister for Finance, the Minister having consulted with the Auth-ority, borrow money exceeding the amount specified in subsections
(1)or(2)for the purposes of providing for current or capital expen-
diture by means of—
(a) temporary borrowings from financial institutions, or
(b) the creation of stock or other forms of security to be
issued, transferred, dealt with and redeemed in such man-ner and on such terms and conditions as the corporation,with the consents aforesaid, may determine.
(4) The Minister may attach to any consent granted under subsec-
tion (3) such particular terms or conditions as he or she considers
appropriate in the circumstances.
(5) The terms upon which monies are borrowed under this section
may include provisions charging the monies and interest thereonupon all property of whatsoever kind for the time being vested inthe corporation or upon any particular property of the corporationand provisions establishing the priority of such charges amongstthemselves.
108.—(1) The commercial activities undertaken by a corporation
in pursuance of its exploitation of commercial opportunities objectshall—
(a) be operated in an efficient manner so as to maximise
revenues, and
(b) be used to subsidise its public service objects.
(2) All transactions or arrangements entered into by a corpor-
ation as between the activities arising from—
(a) its public service objects, and
109Pt.7 S.106
Borrowings.
Transactions
between publicservice andcommercialopportunities.Pt.7 S.108
Accounts and audit.
110[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) its exploitation of commercial opportunities object,
shall be made at arm’s length and on commercial terms.
(3) On the direction of the Minister, the Compliance Committee
shall prepare and submit to the Minister a report on compliance bythe corporation with the requirements of subsection (2) .
109.—(1) A corporation shall submit estimates of income and
expenditure to the Minister in such form, in respect of such periodsand at such times, as may be required by the Minister and shall fur-nish to the Minister any information which the Minister may requirein relation to such estimates, including proposals and future plansrelating to the performance by the corporation of its functions overa period of years, as required.
(2) A director general, under the direction of the board of his or
her corporation, shall cause to be kept, on a continuous basis, allproper and usual books or other records of account in respect of—
(a) all income and expenditure of the corporation,
(b) the sources of such income and the subject matter of such
expenditure, and
(c) the property, assets and liabilities of the corporation.
(3) The accounts of a corporation for each financial year shall be
prepared in accordance with accounting standards by the directorgeneral and approved by the board of the corporation as soon aspracticable but not later than three months after the end of the finan-cial year to which they relate for submission to—
(a) in respect of RTE ´, such duly qualified auditors as the
board of RTE ´shall appoint, and
(b) in respect of TG4, the Comptroller and Auditor General,
for audit.
(4) A copy of the accounts referred to in subsection (3) and the
report of the auditors appointed by the board of RTE ´under para-
graph (a) ofsubsection (3) or the Comptroller and Auditor General,
as the case may be, thereon shall, as soon as may be but not laterthan 6 months after the end of the financial year to which they relate,be presented to the board of the relevant corporation and to theMinister.
(5) The financial year of a corporation shall be the period of 12
months ending on 31 December in any year.
(6) A corporation shall, if so required by the Minister, furnish to
him or her, such information as he or she may require in respect ofany balance sheet, account or report of the corporation or in relationto the policy and operations of the corporation other than day-to-day operations.
(7) ( a) A corporation, its director general and any relevant
member of staff of the corporation shall, whenever sorequested by the Minister, permit any person appointedby the Minister to examine the books or other records of[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
account of the corporation in respect of any financial year
or other period and shall facilitate any such examination.
(b) In this subsection “relevant member of staff” means a
member of the staff of the corporation in respect ofwhom there have been duly assigned duties which relateto the books or other records of account referred to inparagraph (a) .
(8) A director general, under the direction of the board of his or
her corporation, shall cause to be kept all such special accounts asthe Minister may from time to time direct.
(9) Without prejudice to subsection (3) and section 110 , a corpor-
ation shall as soon as may be after the end of each financial year,send to the Minister—
(a) a statement of the use it has made, of the monies paid to
it under section 123 in that financial year, in pursuance of
its public service objects, and
(b) a statement in respect of the total revenue and costs
derived by the corporation in that financial year dis-tinguishing between monies received or expended on—
(i) activities in pursuance of its public service objects,
and
(ii) activities in pursuance of its exploitation of commer-
cial opportunities object.
(10) A corporation shall include in the statement required under
subsection (9) a statement of the cost accounting principles and
methods by which costs and revenues have been assigned to suchactivities.
(11) The Authority, at the direction of the Minister, and having
consulted with a corporation, shall prepare and publish guidance for
the corporation as regards the cost accounting principles andmethods to be considered by the corporation in preparing a state-ment under subsection (9) .
(12) Any guidance issued by the Authority under subsection (11)
shall be general in nature and shall not specify the particular itemsto be included in preparing a statement under subsection (9) to which
the guidance relates.
(13) The Compliance Committee, at the direction of the Minister,
shall review and report to the Minister on the extent to which astatement prepared under subsection (9) complies with the guidance
issued by the Authority under subsection (11) .
(14) The Minister may give directions to a corporation as to the
format of a statement prepared under subsection (9) .
(15) The Minister shall cause the documents furnished to him or
her under this section to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(16) In this section “accounting standards” has the same meaning
as in section 205A(1) of the Companies Act 1990.
111Pt.7 S.109Pt.7
Reports and
information.
Access to archives.
112[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
110.—(1) A corporation shall, not later than 30 June in each year
make a report to the Minister (in this section referred to as the “an-nual report”) in such form as the Minister may approve, on the per-formance of its functions and activities during the preceding year,and the Minister shall cause copies of the report to be laid beforeeach House of the Oireachtas.
(2) Whenever the Minister so directs, the annual report shall also
include such additional information on the performance of the cor-poration’s functions and activities during the preceding year as theMinister may specify.
(3) A corporation shall co-operate with the Minister and the
Authority in the performance of their respective functions under thisAct including providing them with all necessary information.
(4) RTE ´shall on the third and fifth anniversaries of 18 April 2007
carry out a review of the provision of the television broadcastingservice and sound broadcasting service referred to in paragraph (f)
ofsection 114(1) .
(5) RTE ´shall make a report to the Minister of each review
carried out by it under subsection (4) .
(6) The Minister shall cause copies of each report made to him or
her under subsection (5) to be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas.
111.—(1) A corporation shall make reasonable arrangements,
itself or with such person or persons as it chooses, for public accessto an archive or library established or maintained in pursuance ofsection 114(1)(e) orsection 118(1)(e) with or without charge, such
charge not to exceed the estimated cost of the search for andretrieval of items contained in the archive or library.
(2) Arrangements made under subsection (1) shall not encompass
the copying or reuse of material contained in an archive or library.
(3) A corporation may enter into an arrangement with a public
service broadcaster for the reuse with or without charge by the publicservice broadcaster, in pursuance of its public service objects andfunctions under this Part, of items contained in any archive or librarymaintained by the corporation, such charge not to exceed the esti-mated cost of the search and retrieval of such items.
(4) A corporation shall prepare and submit to the Minister for his
or her approval, following consultation with the Authority, a schemefor the licensing of the use and exploitation by third parties of soundand television recordings over which the corporation holds copyrightand related rights.
(5) A scheme shall provide separate terms and conditions of lic-
encing for—
(a) non-commercial bona fide educational and research
purposes,
(b) commercial purposes, and
(c) other purposes.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (4) a corpor-
ation may—
(a) specify more favourable charges, terms and conditions in
respect of programme material used for the purpose ofIrish language broadcasts, and
(b) attach to a scheme such particular terms or conditions as
it considers appropriate.
(7) Any amendment or revocation of a scheme shall be submitted
by the corporation to the Minister for his or her approval.
(8) A scheme shall, if approved of by the Minister, be—
(a) published (including publication on a website maintained
by the corporation), and
(b) carried out in accordance with its terms,
by the corporation.
(9) The Minister shall cause a scheme approved under subsection
(4)to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practi-
cable after it is made.
(10) The corporation shall ensure that provision is made for
resolving disputes arising in respect of the operation of a scheme (byindependent arbitration or otherwise) in a manner that appears tothe Minister to be appropriate.
(11) The Compliance Committee shall, at the direction of the
Minister, report to the Minister on compliance by the corporationwith this section.
(12) In this section “scheme” means a scheme prepared and sub-
mitted to the Minister under subsection (4) .
112.—(1) It is the duty of a corporation to prepare and publish,
within 15 months of the passing of this Act, and every fourth yearthereafter, a code of fair trading practice (in this section referred toas a “code”) setting out the principles that it shall apply when agree-ing terms for the commissioning of programming material from inde-pendent producers.
(2) The Authority, having consulted with the Minister, a corpor-
ation, and independent producers (or such persons appearing to theAuthority to represent them), shall within 12 months of the passingof this Act and every fourth year thereafter, prepare and issue guid-ance to the corporation on the format of a code required under sub-
section (1) .
(3) The guidance issued by the Authority under subsection (2)
shall be general in nature and shall not specify the particular itemsto be included in a code to which the guidance relates.
(4) A corporation, having considered the guidance received under
subsection (2) , shall prepare and submit for approval to the Minister
a code.
(5) A code shall include reference to a corporation’s approach
to—
113Pt.7 S.111
Code of fair trading
practice.Pt.7 S.112
Raidio ´Teilifı ´s
E´ireann.
Principal objects
and associatedpowers of RTE ´.
114[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) multi-annual commissioning,
(b) acquisition of rights, and
(c) timetable for contractual negotiations.
(6) In meeting the requirements of subsection (5)(b) the corpor-
ation shall address the arrangements it proposes to adopt in respectof the duration and exclusivity of the various categories of rights itintends to acquire.
(7) The Minister shall, in considering a code, consult with the
Authority.
(8) On approval by the Minister the code shall be deemed to have
come into force and the corporation shall comply with such a code.
(9) A corporation shall ensure that provision is made for resolving
disputes arising in respect of the provisions of a code (by indepen-dent arbitration or otherwise) in a manner that appears to the Mini-ster to be appropriate.
(10) The Compliance Committee shall, at the direction of the
Minister, report to the Minister on compliance by a corporation witha code prepared under this section.
(11) A corporation may with the approval of the Minister, the
Minister having consulted with the Authority, revise and publishamendments to a code.
(12) RTE ´shall co-operate with independent producers in the
marketing outside the State of sound broadcasting and televisionprogrammes commissioned by RTE ´from independent producers.
Chapter 2
Provisions specific to RTE ´
113.—(1) The name of Radio Telefı ´sE´ireann (changed by section
3 of the Broadcasting Authority (Amendment) Act 1966) is changedand following the passing of this Act is to be known as Raidio ´Teil-
ifı´sE´ireann.
(2) Raidio ´Teilifı ´sE´ireann continues in being.
114.—(1) The objects of RTE ´are—
(a) to establish, maintain and operate a national television and
sound broadcasting service which shall have the characterof a public service, be a free-to-air service and be madeavailable, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, to thewhole community on the island of Ireland,
(b) to establish and maintain a website and teletext services in
connection with the services of RTE ´under paragraphs
(a),(c),(d),(e),(f),(g),(h)and (i),
(c) to establish and maintain orchestras, choirs and other cul-
tural performing groups in connection with the servicesof RTE ´under paragraphs (a) ,(f),(g)and (h),[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(d) to assist and co-operate with the relevant public bodies in
preparation for, and execution of, the dissemination ofrelevant information to the public in the event of amajor emergency,
(e) to establish and maintain archives and libraries containing
materials relevant to the objects of RTE ´under this
subsection,
(f) to establish, maintain and operate a television broadcast-
ing service and a sound broadcasting service which shallhave the character of a public service, which services shallbe made available, in so far as RTE ´considers reasonably
practicable, to Irish communities outside the island ofIreland,
(g) subject to the consent of the Minister, the Minister having
consulted with the Authority, to establish, maintain andoperate, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, com-munity, local, or regional broadcasting services, whichshall have the character of a public service, and be avail-able free-to-air,
(h) subject to the consent of the Minister, the Minister having
consulted with the Authority, to establish and maintainnon-broadcast non-linear audio-visual media services, inso far as it is reasonably practicable, which shall have thecharacter of a public broadcasting service (such consentnot being required in respect of such services which areancillary to a broadcasting service provided under para-
graphs (a) ,(d),(f)and (g)),
(i) to establish, maintain, and operate one or more national
multiplexes,
(j) so far as it is reasonably practicable, to exploit such com-
mercial opportunities as may arise in pursuit of theobjects outlined in paragraphs (a) to(i).
(2) In pursuit of the objects outlined in subsection (1) , RTE ´
shall—
(a) be responsive to the interests and concerns of the whole
community, be mindful of the need for understandingand peace within the whole island of Ireland, ensure thatthe programmes reflect the varied elements which makeup the culture of the people of the whole island ofIreland, and have special regard for the elements whichdistinguish that culture and in particular for the Irishlanguage,
(b) uphold the democratic values enshrined in the Consti-
tution, especially those relating to rightful liberty ofexpression, and
(c) have regard to the need for the formation of public aware-
ness and understanding of the values and traditions ofcountries other than the State, including in particularthose of other Member States.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , RTE ´
shall ensure that the programme schedules of the broadcasting
services referred to in that subsection—
115Pt.7 S.114Pt.7 S.114
116[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) provide a comprehensive range of programmes in the Irish
and English languages that reflect the cultural diversityof the whole island of Ireland and include programmesthat entertain, inform and educate, provide coverage ofsporting, religious and cultural activities and cater for theexpectations of the community generally as well asmembers of the community with special or minorityinterests and which, in every case, respect human dignity,
(b) provide programmes of news and current affairs in the
Irish and English languages, including programmes thatprovide coverage of proceedings in the Houses of theOireachtas and the European Parliament, and
(c) facilitate or assist contemporary cultural expression and
encourage or promote innovation and experimentationin broadcasting.
(4) The principal express powers of RTE ´in pursuance of the
objects outlined in subsection (1) are—
(a) to establish, maintain and operate broadcasting stations
and to acquire, install and operate apparatus for wire-less telegraphy,
(b) subject to any regulations under the Act of 1926, which
are for the time being in force, to provide for the distri-bution by means of wired broadcast relay stations ofprogrammes broadcast by RTE ´and such other prog-
rammes as RTE ´may decide,
(c) to originate programmes and procure programmes from
any source,
(d) to make contracts, agreements and arrangements inciden-
tal or conducive to the objects of RTE ´,
(e) to acquire and make use of copyrights, patents, licences,
privileges and concessions,
(f) to collect news and information and to subscribe to news
services and such other services as may be conducive tothe objects of RTE ´,
(g) to subscribe to such international associations, and to such
educational, musical and dramatic bodies and such otherbodies promoting entertainment or culture, as may beconducive to the objects of RTE ´,
(h) to organise, provide and subsidise concerts, entertain-
ments, education and other activities in connection witha broadcasting service or for any purpose incidental to itand, in relation to any such concert or entertainment, toprovide or procure accommodation and, if desired, tomake charges for admission,
(i) to prepare, publish and distribute, with or without charge,
such magazines, books, papers and other printed matteras may seem to RTE ´to be conducive or incidental to
its objects,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(j) to arrange with other broadcasting organisations or auth-
orities for the distribution, receipt, exchange and relay ofprogrammes (whether live or recorded),
(k) to compile, publish and distribute, with or without charge,
recorded aural and visual material,
(l) to provide programmes of news and current affairs in the
Irish and English languages, including programmes thatprovide coverage of proceedings in the Houses of theOireachtas and the European Parliament,
(m) to facilitate or assist contemporary cultural expression and
encourage or promote innovation and experimentationin broadcasting,
(n) to invest in, originate or procure films,
(o) to establish and maintain websites,
(p) to establish and maintain an electronic communications
network subject to any enactment or rule of law,
(q) to establish and maintain an “electronic communications
service” meaning a service which consists wholly ormainly of the conveyance of signals on electroniccommunications networks, subject to the provisions ofany enactment or rule of law,
(r) to make available the broadcasting services of RTE ´in so
far as reasonably practicable by any and all means oftransmission, relaying or distribution, whether by way ofbroadcast (which includes terrestrial sound and televisionbroadcasting networks, cable networks or satellitenetworks), or by any form of electronic means (whichincludes fixed terrestrial networks, mobile terrestrial net-works, including the Internet and other electroniccommunications networks) and whether now known orhereinafter invented on a linear or non-linear basis, and
(s) to invest any of its funds in any manner in which a trustee
is empowered by law to invest trust funds.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be read as preventing RTE ´from
including in the programme schedules programmes made outsidethe State.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be read as preventing RTE ´from
providing broadcasting services which are of a special interest to onlycertain members of the community and which are made available ona subscription or pay-per-view basis under its exploitation of com-mercial opportunities object.
(7) RTE ´shall have all such powers as are necessary or incidental
to the attainment of the objects specified in subsection (1) , and which
are not inconsistent with this Act.
(8) RTE ´shall endeavour to ensure that the programme schedules
of the television broadcasting service and the sound broadcastingservice established and maintained pursuant to subsection (1)(f) are,
in so far as it is reasonably practicable, representative of the prog-ramme schedules of the national television and sound broadcastingservices referred to in subsection (1)(a) and section 118(1)(a) .
117Pt.7 S.114Pt.7
Broadcasting
infrastructure.
Independent
programmeaccount.
118[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
115.—(1) The Minister may, at the request of the Authority and
after consultation with RTE ´, require RTE ´to co-operate with a
holder of a sound broadcasting contract in the use of any mast, tower,site or other installation or facility needed in connection with theprovision of transmission facilities for sound broadcasting servicesunder the sound broadcasting contract.
(2) A sound broadcaster shall make to RTE ´such periodical or
other payments in respect of any facilities provided under subsection
(1)as the Minister, after consultation with RTE ´and the Authority,
directs.
116.—(1) RTE ´shall keep an account which shall be known as
the independent programmes account (in this section referred to as
the “account”).
(2) ( a) Monies standing to the credit of the account shall be used
by RTE ´for the purpose of—
(i) commissioning the making of independent television
or sound broadcasting programmes,
(ii) procuring the formulation by persons of proposals for
the commissioning by RTE ´of the making of the
above programmes, and
(iii) assisting the completion of independent television or
sound broadcasting programmes the making ofwhich has not been commissioned by RTE ´,
and for no other purpose.
(b) The amount of monies that RTE ´is required by subsection
(3)to pay into the account in a financial year shall be
expended, unless it is impracticable to do so, within 2years of that financial year.
(c) RTE ´shall not in a financial year use for the purposes
specified in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) ofparagraph (a)
more than 10 per cent of the amount of monies that it isrequired by subsection (3) to pay into the account in that
financial year.
(3) RTE ´shall in each financial year mentioned in column (1) of
Part 1 of the Table to this section pay into the account, in accordance
with subsection (4) , an amount of monies that is not less than the
amount of monies mentioned in column (2) opposite the mention of
the financial year concerned.
(4) The amount of monies required to be paid by subsection (3)
into the account in a financial year shall be so paid in such numberof instalments as RTE ´deems appropriate having regard to its duty
under subsection (2)(b) .
(5) If any of the monies paid under subsection (3) into the account
in a financial year remains unexpended at the end of a two yearperiod from the end of that financial year the Minister may, havingconsulted with the Authority and RTE ´, authorise RTE ´to withdraw[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
those monies or a specified portion of them from the account. Mon-
ies so withdrawn shall thereupon become and be available to RTE ´
for the purposes generally of pursuing its public service objects.
(6) References in this section to the expenditure of monies in the
account include references to the incurring of a legal obligation toexpend such monies.
(7) ( a) The Minister may, having had regard to each of the follow-
ing matters, namely—
(i) the current and prospective financial liabilities of
RTE´,
(ii) the effect (if any) for the time being of the operation
of this section on—
(I) the employment or recruitment of staff by RTE ´,
(II) the performance by RTE ´of its public service
objects, and
(III) the employment of persons in the making of
independent television or sound broadcastingprogrammes,
from time to time by order vary the sum referred to in
the definition of the “appropriate amount” in subsection
(8)(a) and for so long as the order is in force Part 1 of the
Table and the definition are to be read as having effect inaccordance with the order.
(b) Where it is proposed to make an order under this subsec-
tion, a draft of the order shall be laid before each Houseof the Oireachtas and the order shall not be made untila resolution approving of the draft has been passed byeach such House.
(8) ( a)I n Part 1 of the Table to this section “appropriate amount”
means the sum of \40,000,000 as increased by an amount
equal to the appropriate percentage of that sum.
(b) In this subsection the “appropriate percentage” means the
difference between the consumer price index number atmid-August, 2008, and the said number at the mid-August immediately preceding the financial year con-cerned expressed as a percentage of the first-mentionednumber.
(c) If at the second-mentioned date in paragraph (b) the con-
sumer price index number stands at a figure that is lessthan that at which it stood at the first-mentioned date inthat paragraph, the definition of “the appropriateamount” in this subsection has effect as respects the fin-ancial year immediately following the second-mentioneddate as if “reduced” were substituted for “increased” inthat definition.
(9) As soon as may be, but not later than 3 months, after the end
of each financial year, RTE ´shall make a report to the Minister of—
119Pt.7 S.116Pt.7 S.116
120[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) its activities during that financial year as respects com-
missioning the making of independent television or soundbroadcasting programmes,
(b) the name or corporate identity of persons commissioned
to make independent television or sound broadcastingprogrammes,
(c) the operation by it of the account during that financial
year, and
(d) such other matters relating to the matters referred to in
paragraphs (a) ,(b)and (c)as the Minister may direct.
(10) The Minister shall cause copies of the report to be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas.
(11) For the purposes of this Part, the making of an independent
programme shall not be regarded as having been commissioned byRTE´unless, before work on the making of the programme com-
mences, RTE ´has incurred a legal obligation to pay at least 25 per
cent of the cost of its making.
(12) In this section “independent programme” means a television
or sound broadcasting programme made by a person who complieswith the following conditions, namely—
(a) each of the following matters as respects the said prog-
ramme is determined by him or her or by one or morepersons on his or her behalf and over whose activities inrespect of the determination of such matters he or sheexercises control, namely—
(i) the persons who are to participate in the said
programme,
(ii) the persons who are to be involved in the making of
the said programme, and
(iii) the equipment and facilities to be used in the making
of the said programme,
(b) he or she is not a subsidiary of a broadcaster, and
(c) he or she is not a holding company of a broadcaster.
(13) For the purposes of the definition in subsection (12) , where—
(a) two or more broadcasters hold shares in a body corporate
or a holding company of a body corporate, or
(b) each of two or more broadcasters (being shareholders in a
body corporate or a holding company of a bodycorporate) by the exercise of some power exercisable byit without the consent or concurrence of any other personcan appoint or remove a holder of a directorship of thebody corporate or, as the case may be, the holdingcompany,
then, notwithstanding that the body corporate is not a subsidiary of
any of these broadcasters, the body corporate is deemed not to com-ply with the condition specified in paragraph (b) of that definition
if—[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(i) the total number of shares held by the said broadcasters
in the body corporate or, as the case may be, the holdingcompany, or
(ii) the total number of directorships of the body corporate or,
as the case may be, the holding company that the afore-said powers of the said broadcasters may be exercised inrespect of,
is such that, were the said broadcasters to be regarded as one com-
pany, the body corporate would be a subsidiary of it, and
(I) RTE ´is one of the said broadcasters, or
(II) there exists a business relationship between the said
broadcasters that, in the opinion of RTE ´, is of such a
kind as is likely to result in the said broadcasters actingin concert with one another in exercising their rightsunder those shares or in exercising the said powers.
(14) For the purposes of subsection (13)(b) a broadcaster shall be
deemed to have power to appoint to a directorship in relation towhich the condition specified in paragraph ( a)o r( b) of section
155(2) of the Companies Act 1963 is satisfied, and for this purposereferences in those paragraphs to the other company shall be con-strued as references to the broadcaster.
(15) RTE ´shall in each financial year mentioned in column (1) of
Part 2 of the Table to this section use a per cent of the monies paid
into the account that is not less than the per cent mentioned in col-
umn (2) opposite the mention of the financial year concerned for the
purposes of—
(a) commissioning the making of independent sound broad-
casting programmes,
(b) procuring the formulation by persons of proposals for the
commissioning by RTE ´of the making of the above prog-
rammes, and
(c) assisting the completion of independent sound broadcast-
ing programmes the making of which has not been com-missioned by RTE ´,
and for no other purpose.
(16) A minimum of 95 per cent of the monies paid into the
account shall be used by RTE ´for the purpose of—
(a) commissioning the making of independent television
programmes,
(b) procuring the formulation by persons of proposals for the
commissioning by RTE ´of the making of the above prog-
rammes, and
(c) assisting the completion of independent television broad-
casting programmes the making of which has not beencommissioned by RTE ´,
and for no other purpose.
121Pt.7 S.116Pt.7 S.116
Continuance of
Teilifı ´s na Gaeilge.
Principal objects
and associatedpowers of TG4.
122[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
TABLE
Part 1
Independent programmes account
Financial year Amount of monies to be paid by RTE ´
(1) into the account
(2)
2009 \40,000,000
Each subsequent financial year The appropriate amount
Part 2
Independent sound broadcasting programmes
Financial year Minimum percentage of monies paid
into account to be expended by RTE ´on
(1) independent sound broadcasting
programmes
(2)
2009 1.25 per cent
2010 1.50 per cent
2011 2.00 per cent
2012 2.50 per cent
Each subsequent financial year 3.00 per cent
Chapter 3
Provisions specific to TG4
117.—Teilifı ´s na Gaeilge continues in being.
118.—(1) The objects of TG4 are—
(a) to establish, maintain and operate a national television
broadcasting service, which shall have the character of apublic service, be a free-to-air service and be made avail-able, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, to the wholecommunity on the island of Ireland,
(b) to establish and maintain a website and teletext services in
connection with the services of TG4 under paragraphs
(a),(c),(d),(e),(f),(g)and (h),
(c) to establish and maintain choirs and other cultural per-
forming groups in connection with the services of TG4under paragraphs (a) ,(f),(g)and (h),
(d) to assist and co-operate with the relevant public bodies in
preparation for, and execution of, the dissemination ofrelevant information to the public in the event of amajor emergency,
(e) to establish and maintain archives and libraries containing
materials relevant to the objects of TG4 under thissubsection,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(f) to establish, maintain and operate, in so far as it is reason-
ably practicable, a television broadcasting service, whichshall have the character of a public service, to be madeavailable to Irish communities outside of the island ofIreland,
(g) subject to the consent of the Minister, the Minister having
consulted with the Authority, to establish, maintain andoperate in so far as it is reasonably practicable, com-munity, local, or regional broadcasting services, whichshall have the character of a public service, and be avail-able free-to-air,
(h) subject to the consent of the Minister, the Minister having
consulted with the Authority, to establish and maintainnon-broadcast non-linear audio-visual media services, inso far as it is reasonably practicable, which shall have thecharacter of a public broadcasting service (such consentnot being required in respect of such services which areancillary to a broadcasting service provided under para-
graphs (a) ,(d),(f)and (g)),
(i) so far as it is reasonably practicable, to exploit such com-
mercial opportunities as may arise in pursuit of theobjects outlined in paragraphs (a) to(h).
(2) In pursuit of the objects outlined in subsection (1) , TG4
shall—
(a) be responsive to the interests and concerns of the whole
community, be mindful of the need for understandingand peace within the whole island of Ireland, ensure thatthe programmes reflect the varied elements which makeup the culture of the people of the whole island ofIreland, and have special regard for the elements whichdistinguish that culture and in particular for theGaeltachtaı ´,
(b) uphold the democratic values enshrined in the Consti-
tution, especially those relating to rightful liberty ofexpression, and
(c) have regard to the need for the formation of public aware-
ness and understanding of the values and traditions ofcountries other than the State, including in particularthose of other Member States.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , TG4
shall ensure that the programme schedules of the broadcastingservices referred to in that subsection—
(a) provide a comprehensive range of programmes, primarily
in the Irish language, that reflect the cultural diversity ofthe whole island of Ireland and include programmes thatentertain, inform and educate, provide coverage of sport-ing, religious and cultural activities and cater for theexpectations of those of all age groups in the communitywhose preferred spoken language is Irish or who other-wise have an interest in Irish,
(b) provide programmes, primarily in the Irish language, of
news and current affairs,
123Pt.7 S.118Pt.7 S.118
124[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(c) provide coverage of proceedings in the Houses of the
Oireachtas and the European Parliament, and
(d) facilitate or assist contemporary cultural expression and
encourage or promote innovation and experimentationin broadcasting.
(4) The principal express powers of TG4 in pursuance of the
objects outlined in subsection (1) are—
(a) to establish, maintain and operate broadcasting stations
and to acquire, install and operate apparatus for wire-less telegraphy,
(b) subject to any regulations under the Act of 1926, which
are for the time being in force, to provide for the distri-bution by means of wired broadcast relay stations ofprogrammes broadcast by TG4 and such other prog-rammes as TG4 may decide,
(c) to originate programmes and procure programmes from
any source,
(d) to make contracts, agreements and arrangements inciden-
tal or conducive to the objects of TG4,
(e) to acquire and make use of copyrights, patents, licences,
privileges and concessions,
(f) to collect news and information and to subscribe to news
services and such other services as may be conducive tothe objects of TG4,
(g) to subscribe to such international associations, and to such
educational, musical and dramatic bodies and such otherbodies promoting entertainment or culture, as may beconducive to the objects of TG4,
(h) to organise, provide and subsidise concerts, entertain-
ments, education and other activities in connection witha broadcasting service or for any purpose incidental to itand, in relation to any such concert or entertainment, toprovide or procure accommodation and, if desired, tomake charges for admission,
(i) to prepare, publish and distribute, with or without charge,
such magazines, books, papers and other printed matteras may seem to TG4 to be conducive or incidental toits objects,
(j) to arrange with other broadcasting organisations or auth-
orities for the distribution, receipt, exchange and relay ofprogrammes (whether live or recorded),
(k) to compile, publish and distribute, with or without charge,
recorded aural and visual material,
(l) to provide programmes of news and current affairs in the
Irish and English languages, including programmes thatprovide coverage of proceedings in the Houses of theOireachtas and the European Parliament,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(m) to facilitate or assist contemporary cultural expression and
encourage or promote innovation and experimentationin broadcasting,
(n) to invest in, originate or procure films,
(o) to establish and maintain websites,
(p) to establish and maintain an electronic communications
network subject to any enactment or rule of law,
(q) to establish and maintain an “electronic communications
service” meaning a service which consists wholly ormainly in the conveyance of signals on electroniccommunications networks, subject to the provisions ofany enactment or rule of law,
(r) to make available the broadcasting services of TG4 in so
far as reasonably practicable by any and all means oftransmission, relaying or distribution, whether by way ofbroadcast (which includes terrestrial sound and televisionbroadcasting networks, cable networks or satellitenetworks), or by any form of electronic means (whichincludes fixed terrestrial networks, mobile terrestrial net-works, including the Internet and other electroniccommunications networks) and whether now known orhereinafter invented on a linear or non-linear basis, and
(s) to invest any of its funds in any manner in which a trustee
is empowered by law to invest trust funds.
(5) TG4 may, for the purpose of complementing the programme
material it broadcasts in the Irish language, acquire programmematerial in other languages; in acquiring such material, TG4 shallhave regard to the need to maintain the distinctive character of thebroadcasting service referred to in paragraph (a) ofsubsection (1)
and to cater for the expectations of audiences who are not generallycatered for by other broadcasting services.
(6) Nothing in this section is to be read as preventing TG4 from
including in the programme schedules programmes made outsidethe State.
(7) Nothing in this section is to be read as preventing TG4 from
providing broadcasting services which are of a special interest to onlycertain members of the community and which are made available ona subscription or pay-per-view basis under its exploitation of com-mercial opportunities object.
(8) TG4 shall have all such powers as are necessary or incidental
to the attainment of the objects under subsection (1) and which are
not inconsistent with this Act.
(9) Each amount paid to TG4 under section 123(4) shall be used
solely for the purposes of pursuing its public service objects.
119.—The director general of TG4 shall, whenever he or she is
required to do so by a Committee of Da ´il E´ireann established under
the Standing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann to examine and report to Da ´il
E´ireann on the appropriation accounts and the reports of the
Comptroller and Auditor General, give evidence to that Committeeon all matters pertaining to the expenditure of TG4.
125Pt.7 S.118
Accountability of
director general ofTG4 to Committeeof Public Accounts.Pt.7
Duty to supply
programmematerial.
Public service
broadcastinglicence.
Emergencies.
126[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Chapter 4
Exchange of Programme Material and Spectrum Licencing
120.—(1) RTE ´shall provide to TG4 programme material in the
Irish language of such amounts and at such times as may be agreedbetween them, being of such amounts and at such times as, in theiropinion, will result in the equivalent of one hour of such programmematerial being provided daily by RTE ´to TG4.
(2) For the purposes of section 114(8) TG4 shall provide to RTE ´,
in such amounts and at such times as may be agreed between them,programme material representative of the programme schedules ofthe national television broadcasting service referred to in section
118(1)(a) .
121.—(1) The powers conferred on RTE ´by virtue of section
114(4)(a) and(b)shall not be exercised save under a licence (“public
service broadcasting licence”) issued to RTE ´or its agent by the
Communications Regulator and in accordance with any conditionsattached by the Communications Regulator to the licence.
(2) The powers conferred on TG4 by virtue of section 118(4)(a)
and (b)shall not be exercised save under a public service broadcast-
ing licence issued to TG4 or its agent by the Communications Regu-lator and in accordance with any conditions attached by theCommunications Regulator to such licence.
(3) A copy of every public service broadcasting licence shall be
laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be afterthe issue of the licence.
122.—(1) During the continuance of any national emergency the
Minister may suspend any public service broadcasting licence andany licence under section 132(1) or(2)orsection 133(1) or(2), and,
while any such suspension continues, the Minister may operate anyservice which was provided under the suspended licence or requiresuch service to be operated as he or she directs.
(2) Without prejudice to section 114(1)(d) and section 118(1)(d) it
shall be a duty of a corporation, at the direction of the Minister,
to assist and to co-operate with the relevant public bodies in thepreparation for, and execution of, the dissemination of relevantinformation to the public in the event of a major emergency.
(3) If and whenever the Minister shall exercise the powers con-
ferred on him or her by subsection (1) a corporation shall be entitled
to receive from the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forFinance—
(a) such sums as are required to defray any expenses which,
regard being had to the nature of the emergency, havebeen properly and necessarily incurred by the corpor-ation and for meeting which revenue is by reason of theexercise of such powers not otherwise available to thecorporation, and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) compensation for any damage done to any property of the
corporation, being damage directly attributable to theexercise of such powers.
(4) The Minister may direct a corporation to allocate broadcasting
time for announcements for and on behalf of any Minister of theGovernment, in the event of a major emergency, in connection withthe functions of that Minister of the Government, and the corpor-ation shall comply with the direction.
(5) In complying with a direction under subsection (4) a corpor-
ation may broadcast an announcement that it has received such adirection from the Minister.
Chapter 5
Allocation of Public Funding to RTE ´and TG4
123.—(1) The Minister, with the approval of the Minister for Fin-
ance, may pay to RTE ´out of monies provided by the Oireachtas in
respect of each financial year after the passing of this Act, an amountequal to the total of the receipts in that year in respect of televisionlicence fees less—
(a) any expenses certified by the Minister as having been
incurred by him or her in that year in relation to thecollection of those fees, and
(b) any amount paid under section 156(2) .
(2) The amount paid to RTE ´in each financial year under subsec-
tion (1) of this section, shall be used by RTE ´solely for the pur-
poses of—
(a) pursuing its public service objects, and
(b) paying amounts levied on RTE ´under section 33 .
(3) The Minister, with the consent of the Minister for Finance,
may from time to time, pay to RTE ´such an amount as he or she
determines to be reasonable for the purposes of defraying theexpenses incurred by RTE ´in the pursuance of its public service
objects.
(4) The Minister, with the consent of the Minister for Finance,
may from time to time, pay to TG4 such an amount as he or shedetermines to be reasonable for the purposes of defraying theexpenses incurred by TG4 in—
(a) pursuing its public service objects, and
(b) paying amounts levied on TG4 under section 33 .
(5) The Minister in making a determination under subsection (4)
shall consider the multi-annual funding needs of TG4.
124.—(1) In this section—
“CPI” means the consumer price index as compiled by the Central
Statistics Office;
127Pt.7 S.122
Allocation of public
funding.
Recommendations
as to changes topublic funding.Pt.7 S.124
128[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“financial year” means a period of 12 months ending on 31
December;
“(∆CPI)” means the annual percentage change in the CPI;
“annual television licence fee modification” =(∆CPI) +1 %-X ;
“X” means the adjustment recommended by the Authority.
(2) The Authority, shall in each year, carry out a review of the
extent to which a corporation has during the previous financial yearfulfilled the commitments in respect of its public service objectsstated in an annual statement of performance commitments for thatfinancial year and the adequacy or otherwise of public funding toenable the corporation to meet its public service objects.
(3) A corporation shall co-operate with the Authority in the exer-
cise of a review under subsection (2) .
(4) The Authority shall prepare and by 30 June in each year sub-
mit to the Minister a report of the outcome of any review undersubsection (2) .
(5) The Authority shall on the basis of the review under subsec-
tion (2) recommend in a report to the Minister an annual television
licence fee modification and the amount of any payment to be madeto TG4 under section 123(4) .
(6) The Minister shall publish a response to a recommendation of
the Authority under subsection (5) .
(7) The Minister shall cause copies of—
(a) the report of the Authority under subsection (4) ,
(b) the recommendations made by the Authority under sub-
section (5) , and
(c) his or her response to the recommendations of the Auth-
ority under subsection (6) ,
to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(8) The Authority shall within a period of not more than 3 years
after the passing of this Act, and every 5 years thereafter, or asdirected by the Minister, carry out a review of the adequacy or other-wise, of public funding to enable a corporation to meet its publicservice objects.
(9) In carrying out a review under subsection (8) the Authority
shall take account of the following—
(a) the existing financial resources available to a corporation,
(b) the current level of public funding available to a cor-
poration,
(c) the multi-annual nature of public funding requirements,
(d) the level of commercial funding available to a corporation
in pursuance of its exploitation of commercial oppor-tunities object,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(e) the outcome of any review under subsection (2) ,
(f) the public service statement for a corporation in force dur-
ing the period under review,
(g) developments in public service broadcasting inter-
nationally,
(h) reports of the Compliance Committee,
(i) such other matters as the Authority may consider rel-
evant, and
(j) such other matters which the Minister may consider rel-
evant and has communicated to the Authority.
(10) A corporation shall co-operate with the Authority in the
exercise of a review under subsection (8) .
(11) The Authority shall prepare and as soon as practicable sub-
mit to the Minister a report of the outcome of any review undersubsection (8) .
(12) The Authority shall on the basis of the review under subsec-
tion (8) make in a report to the Minister under subsection (11) a
recommendation as to the requisite level of public funding requiredto permit the corporation to fulfil its public service objects.
(13) The Minister shall submit to the Government—
(a) the report of the Authority under subsection (11) , and
(b) the recommendation made by the Authority under subsec-
tion (12) .
(14) The Government shall publish a response to the recommend-
ation of the Authority under subsection (12) .
(15) The Minister shall cause copies of:
(a) the report of the Authority under subsection (11) ,
(b) the recommendation made by the Authority under subsec-
tion (12) , and
(c) the Government’s response to the recommendation of the
Authority under subsection (14) ,
to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(16) The Authority may appoint an agent to perform any acts and
discharge any functions authorised by this section to be performedor discharged by the Authority.
Chapter 6
Bealach Thithe an Oireachtais and Bealach Scanna ´nn ah E ´ireann
125.—(1) In this Chapter “Joint Administration Committee”
means a joint committee of the Houses of the Oireachtas to whichthose Houses have assigned the role of oversight of the broadcastingof the proceedings of the Houses of the Oireachtas.
129Pt.7 S.124
Bealach Thithe an
Oireachtais (Housesof the OireachtasChannel).Pt.7 S.125
Amendment of
Schedule to Housesof the OireachtasCommission Act2003.
Bealach Scanna ´nn a
hE´ireann (Irish
Film Channel).
130[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) The Commission of the Houses of the Oireachtas may estab-
lish, fund and provide a television broadcasting service to be knownas, in the Irish language, Bealach Thithe an Oireachtais or, in theEnglish language, the Houses of the Oireachtas Channel, which shallhave the character of a public service, be a free-to-air service and bemade available, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, to the wholecommunity on the island of Ireland.
(3) The Houses of the Oireachtas Channel shall, as its principal
function, provide coverage of proceedings in the Houses of theOireachtas.
(4) Subject to the consent of the Joint Administration Committee,
the Houses of the Oireachtas Channel may provide coverage ofmatters and events ancillary to proceedings of the Houses of theOireachtas.
(5) The Houses of the Oireachtas Channel may provide coverage
of the proceedings of—
(a) a local authority (within the meaning of the Local Govern-
ment Act 2001),
(b) the implementation bodies (within the meaning of the
British-Irish Agreement Act 1999),
(c) the legislatures of other jurisdictions outside the State,
(d) the institutions of the United Nations, the European Com-
munities and the Council of Europe, and
(e) such other bodies and institutions as the Commission of
the Houses of the Oireachtas considers appropriate.
(6) The Commission of the Houses of the Oireachtas may enter
into such contracts as are necessary to establish and maintain theHouses of the Oireachtas Channel.
(7) The Houses of the Oireachtas Channel shall not broadcast
advertisements and material which, if transmitted, would constitutea direct offer to the public for the sale or supply to them of goodsor other property (whether real or personal) or services.
126.—Schedule 1 to the Houses of the Oireachtas Commission Act
2003 is amended by inserting after paragraph 2( c) the following:
“(cc) costs for the purposes of defraying the expenses
incurred by the Commission in respect of BealachThithe an Oireachtais under section 125 of the
Broadcasting Act 2009 ;”.
127.—(1) The Irish Film Board may establish, fund and provide a
television broadcasting service to be known as, in the Irish language,Bealach Scanna ´nn ah E ´ireann or, in the English language, the Irish
Film Channel, which shall have the character of a public service, be afree-to-air service and be made available, in so far as it is reasonablypracticable, to the whole community on the island of Ireland.
(2) The Irish Film Channel shall, as its principal purpose, provide
programme material consisting of Irish, European, and world films[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
and cinema works including, as far as practicable, film and cinema
works in the Irish language.
(3) The Irish Film Board may enter into such contracts as are
necessary to establish and maintain the Irish Film Channel.
(4) The Irish Film Channel may broadcast advertisements, broad-
cast acknowledgements of sponsorship, may fix charges and con-ditions for such broadcasts and, in fixing the charges, may providefor different circumstances and for additional special charges to bemade in special cases.
(5) The Irish Film Channel may reject any advertisement
presented for broadcast in whole or in part.
(6) The Irish Film Channel in providing a broadcasting service
under this section shall, subject to the consent of the Minister andthe Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism following consultation withthe Authority, fix—
(a) the total daily time for broadcasting advertisements, and
(b) the maximum period given to advertisements in any 3
hour period.
(7) Film and cinema works broadcast by the Irish Film Channel
shall be broadcast uninterrupted by advertisements or acknowledge-ments of sponsorship.
(8) The Minister, if so requested by the Referendum Commission
following consultation by the Referendum Commission with the IrishFilm Channel and consideration of any proposals of the Irish FilmChannel for broadcasts in connection with the referendum that itcommunicates to the Referendum Commission, shall direct the IrishFilm Channel in writing to allocate broadcasting time to facilitate theReferendum Commission in performing its functions, and the IrishFilm Channel shall comply with a direction under this subsection.
(9) Charges and conditions referred to in subsection (4) may be
fixed subject to variations benefiting advertisers who use the Irishlanguage in their advertisements.
(10) A power under this section to fix charges and conditions shall
be read as including a power to cancel or vary any charges or con-ditions fixed under such power and, where charges or conditions arecancelled, to fix other charges or conditions in lieu of those cancelled.
(11) In this section references to advertisements shall be read as
including references to teleshopping material and to advertisingmatter in sponsored programmes, that is to say, programmes sup-plied for advertising purposes by or on behalf of an advertiser.
(12) Nothing in this section shall preclude the Irish Film Channel
from promoting the services of the Irish Film Board or promotingits future broadcasting of featured films and works.
128.—(1) The Irish Film Board shall prepare prior to the pro-
vision of a broadcasting service in respect of the Irish Film Channeland every 5 years thereafter, or as directed by the Minister for Arts,Sport and Tourism, a public service statement, not in conflict withthis Act, setting out the principles to be observed, and activities tobe undertaken by the Irish Film Channel.
131Pt.7 S.127
Oversight of public
funding of Housesof the OireachtasChannel and IrishFilm Channel.Pt.7 S.128
Definitions ( Part 8 ).
132[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) The Commission of the Houses of the Oireachtas shall pre-
pare prior to the provision of a broadcasting service in respect of theHouses of the Oireachtas Channel and every 5 years thereafter, apublic service statement, not in conflict with this Act, setting out theprinciples to be observed, and activities to be undertaken by theHouses of the Oireachtas Channel.
(3) The Authority shall within a period of not more than 5 years
after the passing of this Act and every 5 years thereafter carry out areview of the adequacy or otherwise of public funding to enable thefulfilment of the functions of—
(a) the Houses of the Oireachtas Channel under section 125 ,
and
(b) the Irish Film Channel under section 127 .
(4) The Authority shall prepare and as soon as practicable submit
to the Joint Administration Committee a report of the outcome ofany review under subsection (3) in respect of the Houses of the
Oireachtas Channel.
(5) The Authority shall prepare and as soon as practicable submit
to the Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism a report of the outcomeof any review under subsection (3) in respect of the Irish Film
Channel.
PART 8
Digital Broadcasting and Analogue Switch-Off
129.—In this Part—
“Acts of 1926 to 2009” means Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1926 to 2009 ;
“multiplex” means an electronic system which combines programme
material and related and other data in a digital form and the trans-mission of that material and data so combined by means of wirelesstelegraphy directly or indirectly for reception by the general public;
“multiplex licence” means a licence under section 132(1) or(2),
section 133(1) or(2), or a television or sound broadcasting mul-
tiplex licence;
“sound broadcasting multiplex” means a multiplex in which the prog-
ramme material is predominantly sound;
“sound broadcasting multiplex licence” means a licence issued for
the purposes of subsection (3), (4) or(5)ofsection 133 ;
“television multiplex” means a multiplex in which the programme
material is predominantly television;
“television multiplex licence” means a licence issued for the purposes
ofsubsection (3) or(4)ofsection 132 ;
“television programme service contract” means a contract entered
into under section 70 .[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
130.—(1) ( a) A national television multiplex established, main-
tained and operated by RTE ´under section 114(1)(i) shall
provide for the broadcasting by digital means of—
(i) the national television broadcasting service commonly
known as RTE ´One and RTE ´Two,
(ii) TG4,
(iii) where required by the Minister—
(I) The Houses of the Oireachtas Channel, and
(II) The Irish Film Channel,
(iv) such other television services, having the character of
a public service, as may be designated by the Mini-ster by order, and
(v) where required by RTE ´or where required by the
Minister, after consultation with the Authority,transmissions of data necessary to ensure the propermaintenance and functioning and updating of receiv-ing equipment required for reception and viewing ofservices referred to in this paragraph and the mul-tiplexes referred to in section 132(3) and (4).
(b) RTE ´shall—
(i) ensure that the national television multiplex referred
to in paragraph (a) is established as a matter of
priority, and—
(I) on such date as may be specified by the Minister
by order, is operational and available free-to-airto approximately 90 per cent of the population,and
(II) by 31 December 2011, or such later date as may
be specified by the Minister by order, is oper-ational, available free-to-air and capable of pro-viding coverage to the same extent as is, on thepassing of this Act, available by free-to-air ana-logue means,
and
(ii) at the request of the Minister, report to the Minister
on its progress in relation to the activities set out insubparagraph (i) .
(c) RTE ´shall take steps to promote the availability of equip-
ment capable of receiving, identifying, decoding and dis-playing a national television multiplex operated by RTE ´
under section 114(1)(i) .
(d) Nothing in this subsection precludes RTE ´from making
provision in a multiplex established, maintained andoperated by RTE ´under section 114(1)(i) for the broad-
casting by digital means of programme material andrelated and other data other than that broadcast as partof a service specified in paragraph (a) .
133Pt.8
Additional
functions of RTE ´.Pt.8 S.130
134[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(e) Without prejudice to the requirements of this section,
RTE´may, with the consent of the Minister, the Minister
having consulted with the Authority, in respect of the useof spare capacity on a multiplex established, maintainedand operated by RTE ´under section 114(1)(i) , broadcast
programme material in pursuance of its exploitation ofcommercial opportunities object.
(2) TG4 shall make to RTE ´such periodic or other payments in
respect of any service provided by RTE ´for the purposes set out in
subsection (1)(a) of broadcasting by digital means TG4 as the Mini-
ster, after consultation with the Communications Regulator, RTE ´
and TG4, may direct.
(3) In the event that TG4 does not consider the digital capacity
employed by RTE ´for the purposes set out in subsection (1)(a) of
broadcasting by digital means TG4 to be adequate, the Minister may,at the request of TG4, direct RTE ´to employ a specific amount of
digital capacity.
(4) The Commission of the Houses of the Oireachtas shall make
to RTE ´such periodic or other payments in respect of any service
provided by RTE ´for the purposes set out in subsection (1)(a) of
broadcasting by digital means the Houses of the Oireachtas Channelas the Minister, after consultation with the Communications Regu-lator, RTE ´and the Commission of the Houses of the Oireachtas,
may direct.
(5) In the event that the Commission of the Houses of the
Oireachtas does not consider the digital capacity employed by RTE ´
for the purposes set out in subsection (1)(a) of broadcasting by digital
means the Houses of the Oireachtas Channel to be adequate, theMinister may, at the request of the Commission of the Houses of theOireachtas, direct RTE ´to employ a specific amount of digital
capacity.
(6) The Irish Film Board shall make to RTE ´such periodic or
other payments in respect of any service provided by RTE ´for the
purposes set out in subsection (1)(a) of broadcasting by digital means
the Irish Film Channel as the Minister, after consultation with theCommunications Regulator, RTE ´and the Irish Film Board, may
direct.
(7) In the event that the Irish Film Board does not consider the
digital capacity employed by RTE ´for the purposes set out in subsec-
tion (1)(a) of broadcasting by digital means the Irish Film Channel
to be adequate, the Minister may, at the request of the Irish FilmBoard, direct RTE ´to employ a specific amount of digital capacity.
(8) A provider of a television service designated by the Minister
under subsection (1)(a)(iv) shall make to RTE ´such periodic or other
payments in respect of any service provided by RTE ´for the purposes
ofsubsection (1)(a)(iv) as the Minister, after consultation with the
Communications Regulator, RTE ´and the provider of the television
service, may direct.
(9) In the event that a provider of a television service under sub-
section (1)(a)(iv) does not consider the digital capacity employed by
RTE´for the purposes set out in subsection (1)(a)(iv) to be adequate,
the Minister may, at the request of the provider, direct RTE ´to
employ a specific amount of digital capacity.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(10) The Minister shall, at the request of the Authority and after
consultation with RTE ´require RTE ´to make provision in a multiplex
established, maintained and operated by RTE ´under section 114(1)(i)
for the broadcasting by digital means of the television programmeservice provided under the television programme service contract bythe television programme service contractor.
(11) If the Minister makes a requirement of RTE ´under subsec-
tion (10) , the television programme service contractor shall make to
RTE´such periodic or other payments in respect of any service pro-
vided by RTE ´in meeting that requirement as the Minister, after
consultation with the Communications Regulator, RTE ´and the tele-
vision programme service contractor, may direct.
(12) If the Minister makes a requirement of RTE ´under subsec-
tion (10) and in the event that the television programme service con-
tractor does not consider the digital capacity employed by RTE ´for
the purposes of broadcasting by digital means the television prog-ramme service to be adequate, the Minister may, at the request ofthe television programme service contractor and after consultationwith the Authority, direct RTE ´to employ a specific amount of digi-
tal capacity.
(13) A national sound multiplex established, maintained and
operated by RTE ´under section 114(1)(i) shall provide for the broad-
casting by digital means of such other sound broadcasting services,having the character of a public service, as may be designated by theMinister by order.
(14) A provider of a sound broadcasting service designated by the
Minister under subsection (13) shall make to RTE ´such periodic or
other payments in respect of any service provided by RTE ´for the
purposes of subsection (13) as the Minister, after consultation with
the Communications Regulator, RTE ´and the provider of the sound
broadcasting service, may direct.
(15) ( a) An order made under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable after itis made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which an order was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph (a) , pass a resolution annul-
ling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of an order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
131.—(1) It is the function of the Authority to arrange, in accord-
ance with this Part, for the establishment, maintenance and operationof multiplexes, including national multiplexes, in addition to anymultiplexes established, maintained and operated by RTE ´under
section 114(1)(i) .
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1) the Authority shall, with
persons (“multiplex contractors”) enter into contracts (“multiplexcontracts”) under which the multiplex contractors have, subject tothis Part, the right and duty to establish, maintain and operate amultiplex in the area specified in the multiplex contract and inaccordance with the terms of the contract.
135Pt.8 S.130
Additional
functions ofAuthority.Pt.8 S.131
Duty of
CommunicationsRegulator in respectof digital terrestrialtelevisionmultiplexes.
136[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(3) It is a duty of the Compliance Committee to ensure that every
multiplex contractor complies with this Part.
(4) It is a duty of the Authority to endeavour to arrange, as a
matter of priority, for the establishment, maintenance and operationof 3 national television multiplexes, which multiplexes, in so far as itis reasonably practicable, shall be capable of being transmitted bydigital terrestrial means to the whole community in the State.
(5) The Authority has all such powers as are necessary for or inci-
dental to the performance of its functions under this Part including,in particular, the power to consult with the Communications Regu-lator as it sees fit.
132.—(1) The Communications Regulator, at the request of RTE ´,
shall issue to RTE ´a licence in respect of the establishment, mainten-
ance and operation of a single television multiplex, which multiplexshall, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, be capable of beingtransmitted by digital terrestrial means to the whole community inthe State.
(2) The Communications Regulator, at the request of RTE ´and
after consultation with the Minister and with the Authority regardingthe digital capacity requirements of TG4, the television programmeservice contractor, the Houses of the Oireachtas Channel, the IrishFilm Channel, and any television service designated under section
130(1)(a)(iv) , shall issue to RTE ´a licence in respect of the establish-
ment, maintenance and operation of one further television multiplex,which multiplex shall, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, becapable of being transmitted by digital terrestrial means to the wholecommunity in the State.
(3) The Communications Regulator, at the request of the Auth-
ority, shall issue to the Authority under the Acts of 1926 to 2009 ,
subject to this Part, television multiplex licences in respect of theestablishment, maintenance and operation of 4 television mul-tiplexes, which multiplexes shall, in so far as it is reasonably practi-cable, be capable of being transmitted by digital terrestrial means tothe whole community in the State, in accordance with contracts tobe entered into by the Authority under section 136(2) .
(4) The Communications Regulator shall consult with the Auth-
ority regarding the desirability of it issuing to the Authority undertheActs of 1926 to 2009 , subject to this Part, further television mul-
tiplex licences in respect of the establishment, maintenance and oper-ation of additional television multiplexes, which multiplexes shall, inso far as it is reasonably practicable, be capable of being transmittedby digital terrestrial means to the whole community in the State, in
accordance with additional contracts entered into by the Authorityunder section 136(2) .
(5) Nothing in this section shall be read as preventing the
Communications Regulator, following consultation with the Ministerand with the Authority, from issuing under the Acts of 1926 to 2009 ,
other licences authorising the combination, by means of a multiplexother than a multiplex to which subsections (1) ,(2)or(3)relate, of
programme material and related and other data in a digital form,subject to such conditions as the Authority may consider necessaryto impose in a contract entered into under section 71 .[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
133.—(1) The Communications Regulator, at the request of RTE ´,
shall issue to RTE ´a licence in respect of the establishment, mainten-
ance and operation of a single sound broadcasting multiplex, whichmultiplex shall, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, be capable ofbeing transmitted by digital terrestrial means to the whole com-munity in the State.
(2) The Communications Regulator, at the request of RTE ´and
after consultation with the Minister and the Authority, shall issueto RTE ´a licence in respect of the establishment, maintenance and
operation of one further sound broadcasting multiplex, which mul-tiplex shall, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, be capable ofbeing transmitted by digital terrestrial means to the whole com-munity in the State.
(3) The Communications Regulator, at the request of the Auth-
ority, shall issue to the Authority under the Acts of 1926 to 2009 ,
subject to this Part, a sound broadcasting multiplex licence in respectof the establishment, maintenance and operation of one soundbroadcasting multiplex, which multiplex shall, in so far as it is reason-ably practicable, be capable of being transmitted by digital terrestrialmeans to the whole community in the State, in accordance with con-tracts to be entered into by the Authority under section 136(2) .
(4) The Communications Regulator, at the request of the Auth-
ority, shall issue to the Authority under the Acts of 1926 to 2009 ,
subject to this Part, sound broadcasting multiplex licences in respect
of the establishment, maintenance and operation of one or moresound broadcasting multiplexes, which multiplexes shall, in so far asit is reasonably practicable, be capable of being transmitted by digitalterrestrial means to the whole community in an area of the Statespecified by the Authority, which area may consist of the whole orany part of the State, in accordance with contracts to be entered intoby the Authority under section 136(2) .
(5) The Communications Regulator shall consult with the Auth-
ority regarding the desirability of it issuing to the Authority undertheActs of 1926 to 2009 , subject to the provisions of this Part, further
licences in respect of the establishment, maintenance and operationof additional sound broadcasting multiplexes, which multiplexesshall, in so far as it is reasonably practicable, be capable of beingtransmitted by digital terrestrial means to the whole community inan area of the State specified by the Authority, which area may con-sist of the whole or any part of the State, in accordance withadditional contracts to be entered into by the Authority undersection 136(2) .
(6) Nothing in this section shall be read as preventing the
Communications Regulator, following consultation with the Ministerand with the Authority, from issuing under the Acts of 1926 to 2009 ,
other licences authorising the combination, by means of a multiplexother than a multiplex to which subsections (1) ,(2),(3)or(4)relate,
of programme material and related and other data in a digital form,subject to such conditions as the Authority may consider necessaryto impose in a contract entered into under section 71 .
134.—(1) In this section—
“Committee” means Contract Awards Committee;
137Pt.8
Duty of
CommunicationsRegulator in respectof digital terrestrialsound broadcastingmultiplexes.
Amendment of
sound broadcastingcontracts for listedsimulcast services.Pt.8 S.134
138[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“listed simulcast service” means a sound broadcasting service desig-
nated for the purpose of a contract amendment as set out in subsec-
tion (7)(b) ;
“relevant incumbent” means the holder of a sound broadcasting con-
tract under subsection (3) .
(2) Where the Authority directs the Committee to invite appli-
cations for sound broadcasting multiplex contracts under section 136 ,
the Authority may also direct the Committee to offer to existingsound broadcasting contractors who are relevant incumbents a simul-casting contract extension.
(3) Where the Committee, in inviting applications for sound
broadcasting multiplex contracts under section 136 , specifies the
coverage area under section 136(3) , it may identify, according to its
own procedures, sound broadcasting contractors who, under soundbroadcasting contracts have the right and duty to establish, maintainand operate sound broadcasting transmitters in part or all of thecoverage area specified under section 136(3) , and such sound broad-
casting contractors will be known as relevant incumbents.
(4) In identifying relevant incumbents under subsection (3) , the
Committee may use whatever procedures it considers necessary,including consultation with the Communications Regulator, and anyidentification by the Committee of a relevant incumbent shall befinal.
(5) Where the Committee has identified a relevant incumbent, it
shall propose to the Authority that the relevant incumbent is offereda designation as a listed simulcast service for the purpose of ensuringsimulcasts of sound broadcasting contract services on sound broad-casting multiplexes.
(6) Where the Committee has proposed to the Authority that a
relevant incumbent be offered a designation as a listed simulcastservice, the Authority shall offer to the relevant incumbent anamendment to its relevant sound broadcasting contract(“simulcasting amendment”) and the relevant incumbent shall have60 days in which to accept in full or reject in full the amendment.
(7) A simulcasting amendment may contain such terms and con-
ditions as the Authority thinks appropriate and shall contain the fol-lowing terms and conditions:
(a) an increase in the period during which the existing sound
broadcasting contract shall continue in force,
(b) a designation of the sound broadcasting contractor’s sound
broadcasting service as a “listed simulcast service” for thepurpose of this Part,
(c) a requirement on the sound broadcasting contractor to
provide its sound broadcasting service so that it may beprovided as part of a digital sound broadcasting multiplexunder this Part, and
(d) a requirement to enter into any such subsequent agree-
ments with sound broadcasting multiplex contractorswhich the Authority may specify, including agreementsin relation to the payment of appropriate fees in relationto the costs of establishing, maintaining and operating a[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
multiplex to the sound broadcasting multiplex contractor
or contractors.
(8) The increase in the period during which an existing sound
broadcasting contract continues in force under subsection (7)(a) shall
be not more than 6 years.
(9) Where a relevant incumbent fails to meet its obligations under
subsection (7)(c) or(d), the simulcasting amendment to its sound
broadcasting contract will be considered to be null and void.
135.—(1) Every multiplex licence shall be issued on payment of
such fees (if any) as may be prescribed in regulations by theCommunications Regulator, with the consent of the Minister.
(2) Regulations made under this section may prescribe in relation
to all such licences or any particular class or classes of such licences—
(a) the fees to be paid on the grant or renewal of such
licences, and
(b) the time and manner at and in which such fees are to be
paid.
(3) ( a) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid
before each House of the Oireachtas by the Communi-cations Regulator as soon as may be after it is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a regulationwas laid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) , annul
the regulation.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of a regulation takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done underthe regulation before the passing of the resolution.
136.—(1) In order to secure the orderly establishment, mainten-
ance and operation of multiplexes the Authority shall from time totime having regard to the availability of radio frequencies for mul-tiplexes, specify the coverage area (which area may consist of awhole or any part of the State) in which programme material andrelated and other data shall be broadcast pursuant to a multiplexcontract and shall direct the Contract Awards Committee to inviteapplications for a multiplex contract and the Contract Awards Com-mittee shall comply with the direction.
(2) Subject to this Part, the Contract Awards Committee may
recommend that the Authority enter into such multiplex contracts,and the Authority shall follow any such recommendation.
(3) Where the Contract Awards Committee invites applications
for a multiplex contract it shall by public notice specify the coveragearea (specified by the Authority under subsection (1) ) in which the
programme material and related and other data shall be broadcastpursuant to such contract (in this section referred to as “maximumcoverage area”) and by such notice shall invite persons interested inestablishing and maintaining a multiplex to apply for such contract.
(4) Every notice under subsection (3) shall—
139Pt.8 S.134
Regulations
prescribing fees.
Applications for
multiplex contracts.Pt.8 S.136
Determination of
applications foraward of multiplexcontracts.
140[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) be published on a website maintained by the Authority,
and where appropriate, in a newspaper circulating in thearea to be served,
(b) specify the procedure to be followed in order to make an
application, and
(c) specify any other matters which appear to the Contract
Awards Committee to be necessary or relevant.
(5) The Contract Awards Committee may, in a notice under sub-
section (3) , specify the minimum coverage area in which the prog-
ramme material and related and other data shall be broadcast underthe contract, which coverage area may be less than that of themaximum coverage area specified in the notice.
(6) Notwithstanding subsection (3) , where a minimum coverage
area is specified in a notice under that subsection the coverage areain which the programme material and related and other data shallbe broadcast pursuant to any contract entered into on foot of suchnotice shall be the minimum coverage area so specified, subject tothe requirement that every effort is made by the person to whom thecontract is awarded to ensure that the programme material andrelated and other data is broadcast in as much of the maximumcoverage area as is practicable.
(7) Where the Authority directs the Contract Awards Committee
to invite applications for sound broadcasting multiplex contractsunder subsection (1) , the Contract Awards Committee shall, as part
of the notice, indicate whether any listed simulcast services shall becontained on the multiplex.
137.—(1) The Contract Awards Committee shall, in accordance
with this Part, consider every application for a multiplex contractreceived by it pursuant to a notice under section 136 for the purpose
of determining the most suitable applicant, if any, to be awarded amultiplex contract.
(2) In the consideration of applications received by it and in
determining the most suitable applicant to be awarded a multiplexcontract, the Contract Awards Committee shall have regard to—
(a) the character, expertise and experience of the applicant or,
if the applicant is a body corporate, the character, expert-ise and experience of the body and its directors, manager,secretary or other similar officer and its members and thepersons entitled to the beneficial ownership of its shares,
(b) the adequacy of the financial resources that will be avail-
able to each applicant and the extent to which the appli-cation accords with good business and economicprinciples,
(c) the range and type of programme material or compilations
of programme material proposed to be included in themultiplex by the applicant and how the applicant pro-poses to secure continued inclusion of such material,
(d) in the case of a television multiplex, the proposals by the
applicant for promoting the acquisition by persons in theproposed coverage area of equipment capable of—[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(i) receiving, identifying and, subject to the viewer gain-
ing any necessary entitlements for non free-to-airservices, decoding and displaying all of the televisionmultiplexes available or expected to be available inthat area, including the national television multiplexreferred to in section 130(1)(a) , and
(ii) enabling such persons to keep themselves informed of
the choice of programme material included in thosemultiplexes,
(e) the extent of the coverage area proposed to be achieved
by the applicant,
(f) the technical proposal, including a timetable for imple-
mentation, regarding the establishment, maintenance andoperation of the proposed multiplex,
(g) in the case of a sound broadcasting multiplex, the pro-
posals by the applicant for facilitating the inclusion of anylisted simulcast services and promoting such services,
(h) any other matters which the Contract Awards Committee
considers to be necessary to secure the orderly establish-ment, maintenance and operation of multiplexes, and
(i) the desirability of allowing any person, or groups of per-
sons, to have control of, or a substantial interest in, anundue amount of communications media in the areaspecified in the notice under section 136(3) .
138.—(1) Every multiplex contract may contain such terms and
conditions as the Authority considers appropriate and specifies inthe contract.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Authority—
(a) may specify in a multiplex contract all or any of the follow-
ing terms or conditions:
(i) in the case of a sound broadcasting multiplex contrac-
tor, a condition requiring the multiplex contractor toimplement any proposals made in his or her appli-cation for facilitating the inclusion of any listedsimulcast services and promoting such services;
(ii) the period during which the contract shall continue
in force;
(iii) whether the contract may be renewed and, if so, the
manner in which, the terms on which, and the periodfor which, the contract may be so renewed;
(iv) a condition prohibiting the assignment of the contract
or of any interest therein without the prior consentof the Authority; and
(v) if the multiplex contractor is a company, a condition
prohibiting any alteration in the Memorandum orArticles of Association of the company or in so muchof that Memorandum or of those Articles as may be
141Pt.8 S.137
Terms and
conditions ofmultiplex contracts.Pt.8 S.138
142[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
specified or prohibiting any material change in the
ownership of the company without the priorapproval of the Authority;
and
(b) may specify in such a contract the following conditions:
(i) a condition requiring the multiplex contractor to
provide the range and type of programmes which heor she proposed to offer in his or her application forthe award of the contract;
(ii) a condition requiring the multiplex contractor to
implement any proposals made in his or her appli-cation for the coverage area of the multiplex or mul-tiplexes;
(iii) a condition requiring the multiplex contractor to
implement the proposals made in his or her appli-cation for the award of the contract for promotingthe acquisition, by persons in the proposed coveragearea of the multiplex, of equipment capable ofreceiving, identifying and, subject to the viewer gain-ing any necessary entitlements for non free-to-airservices, decoding and displaying all of the mul-tiplexes available in that area; and
(iv) following consultation with the Communications
Regulator, any condition requiring the multiplex
contractor to comply with any technical condition asthe Communications Regulator may require in theexercise of its functions.
(3) If a multiplex contract does not contain a condition of the type
specified in subparagraph (iv) or(v)ofsubsection (2)(a) , the follow-
ing provisions shall have effect:
(a) the multiplex contract, or any interest in it, shall not be
assignable, nor shall any alteration be made in the Mem-orandum or Articles of Association of a company whichis a multiplex contractor, nor shall there be any materialchange in the ownership of such a company, without theprevious consent in writing of the Authority, and theAuthority may, if it considers it reasonable so to do,refuse such consent stating the grounds for such refusal;and
(b) in considering whether to grant its consent to an assign-
ment of a multiplex contract, a change in the Memor-andum or Articles of Association of the company whichis the multiplex contractor, or a material change in theownership of such a company, the Authority shall haveregard to the criteria specified in section 137(2) .
(4) Every multiplex contract shall—
(a) provide that a multiplex contractor shall pay to the Auth-
ority the fees (if any) specified in it, including any feespayable by the Authority to the Communications Regu-lator under section 135 , and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) provide that the multiplex contractor shall provide such
information (including copies of his or her accounts) asthe Authority or the Compliance Committee may con-sider it requires in order to enable it carry out its func-tions under this Part.
(5) Every multiplex contract shall be open to inspection by
members of the public at the Authority’s registered office and theAuthority shall, on request made by any person and on payment ofsuch sum (if any) as the Authority may reasonably require, give tothat person a copy of that contract.
(6) The Authority shall, if it considers it appropriate in the con-
text of the interests of the viewer of multiplex services and in thecontext of satisfactory and orderly operation of multiplexes by mul-tiplex contractors, through further multiplex contract conditions,ensure that each television multiplex contractor operates mul-tiplexes, and any associated services, for which they have enteredinto multiplex contracts in relation to multiplexes referred to insection 132(3) and (4)—
(a) in a manner which does not prevent the availing by per-
sons in any area of a single set of receiving equipmentthat receives all television multiplexes in the area on thatone set of receiving equipment, and
(b) in a manner whereby one set of equipment is capable of
supporting encryption systems for all multiplexes thatmay be encrypted but available in the area.
(7) The Authority may specify in each multiplex contract con-
ditions related to subsection (6) .
139.—(1) For the purpose of considering for how long it would
be appropriate for television broadcasting services to continue to beprovided by analogue means, the Minister—
(a) shall keep under review inter alia the extent of—
(i) the availability of multiplexes in the State,
(ii) the availability in the State by digital means of the
services specified in subsection (2) ,
(iii) the ownership or possession in the State of equipment
capable of receiving the services specified in subsec-
tion (2) when transmitted by digital means, and
(iv) the likely future extent of such availability and such
ownership or possession,
and
(b) shall, at such time or times as he or she considers fit and,
in any case, every 6 months from the passing of this Actuntil 31 December 2012, require the Authority and RTE ´
to report to him or her on the matters referred to in para-
graph (a) .
(2) The services specified for the purposes of subparagraphs (ii)
and (iii) ofsubsection (1)(a) are—
143Pt.8 S.138
Analogue switch-
off.Pt.8 S.139
144[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) the national television broadcasting service commonly
known as RTE ´One and RTE ´Two established and main-
tained by RTE ´,
(b) the national television broadcasting service established
and maintained by TG4 under section 118(1)(a) , and
(c) the television programme service provided under the tele-
vision programme service contract by the television prog-ramme service contractor.
(3) For the purpose mentioned in subsection (1) , the Minister
shall, on requiring reports under subsection (1)(b) , consult with—
(a) such persons as appear to the Minister to represent view-
ers as the Minister considers fit, and
(b) such other persons as the Minister considers fit,
regarding the matters referred to in subsection (1)(a) and also, if the
Minister considers fit, regarding the likely effects on viewers of anyof the services referred to in subsection (2) ceasing to be broadcast
by analogue means.
(4) The Minister may, at any stage or following consideration of
a report under subsection (1)(b) , issue a policy direction under
section 13 of the Communications Regulation Act 2002 regardingthe date or dates with effect from which the Communications Regu-lator shall revoke licences granted under section 121 orsection 59 in
respect of the provision of any of the services referred to in subsec-
tion (2) by analogue means.
(5) The Communications Regulator shall, on the passing of this
Act, and as necessary under section 60(1) vary a term or condition
of a licence issued under section 59 to ensure that any contract for
the provision by analogue means of a service referred to in subsection
(2)(c) that is at any stage entered into by the Authority shall contain
a condition that, after a date or dates regarding which the Ministermay issue a policy direction as set out in subsection (4) , the service
may no longer be provided by analogue means.
(6) RTE ´shall take steps to ensure that all viewers of services
referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b)ofsubsection (2) provided by
analogue means are made aware, of the analogue switch-off date ordates, the reasons for it or them, the consequences, and practicalinformation on how such viewers can receive such services by digitalmeans after that date or those dates.
(7) The Authority shall from 1 July 2009 until the analogue
switch-off date or dates provide information to the public in respectof the reception of television services by means of a multiplex andthe reception equipment necessary to receive such televisionservices.
(8) In fulfilling its obligations under subsection (7) the Authority
may consult with multiplex contractors, public service broadcasters,the television programme service contractor and the manufacturersand retailers of such reception equipment.
(9) The Minister, for the purpose of ensuring a smooth and
efficient interchange between the provision of analogue and digitaltelevision services in the context of analogue switch-off, shall have[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
the power by himself or herself, or in conjunction with any other
person, to—
(a) promote cooperation and coordination between broad-
casters, multiplex contractors and other interested partiesin relation to analogue switch-off,
(b) commission research on matters relating to analogue
switch-off,
(c) promote public awareness and the dissemination of
coordinated information to the public in relation to ana-
logue switch-off, and
(d) operate, manage or sponsor, whether in whole or in part,
measures aimed at alleviating the effects of analogueswitch-off on classes of communities or personsadversely affected.
(10) The Minister has all such incidental, supplemental, ancillary
and consequential powers as are necessary or expedient for the pur-pose of the exercise by him or her of the above powers.
(11) The Minister may, after consultation with the Authority, the
Communications Regulator, RTE ´and such other persons (if any) as
he or she considers appropriate, by order—
(a) confer on the Authority, the Communications Regulator
or RTE ´such additional functions connected with prep-
aration for analogue switch-off, as the Minister considersappropriate, subject to the conditions (if any) that maybe specified in the order, and
(b) make such provision as he or she considers necessary or
expedient in relation to matters ancillary to or arising outof the conferral of those additional functions.
(12) ( a) An order made under subsection (11) shall be laid before
each House of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable afterit is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which an order was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph (a) , pass a resolution annul-
ling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of an order takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anything that was done underthe order before the passing of the resolution.
(13) In subsection (6) “analogue switch-off date or dates” means
the date or dates with effect from which the Communications Regu-lator shall revoke any licences specified in subsection (4) .
145Pt.8 S.139Definitions ( Part 9 )
— order —“specified place”.
Laying regulations
and orders — Part
9.
146[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
PART 9
Television Licence
140.—(1) In this Part—
“apartment” means a self-contained residential unit in a building that
comprises a number of such units;
“issuing agent” has the meaning assigned to it by section 145(1) ;
“officer of an issuing agent” means a person appointed as an officer
of an issuing agent under section 146(1) ;
“premises” means land, a vehicle, a structure of any kind whether
attached or affixed to the land or not and includes a part of a buildingoccupied as a separate dwelling whether or not the occupier with anyother person shares any portion of it or any accommodation, amenityor facility in connection with it;
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Minister;“reminder notification” has the meaning assigned to it in section
149(1) ;
“specified place” includes an apartment, holiday apartment or any
individual room specified by order under subsection (2) ;
“television licence” means a licence granted under section 143 ;
“television set” means any electronic apparatus capable of receiving
and exhibiting television broadcasting services broadcast for generalreception (whether or not its use for that purpose is dependent onthe use of anything else in conjunction with it) and any software orassembly comprising such apparatus and other apparatus;
“vehicle” means a vehicle other than a mechanically propelled
vehicle (within the meaning of section 3 of the Road Traffic Act1961) capable of being lived in being a caravan or a mobile home.
(2) The Minister may by order specify that a specified place
includes individual rooms or a number of such within a premises usedfor commercial purposes, apart-hotel, hotel, place normally used forindoor public entertainment, licensed premises (within the meaningof section 2 of the Intoxicating Liquor Act 2003), registered club(within the meaning of section 13 of the Registration of Clubs(Ireland) Act 1904) or place of work.
141.—(1) Every regulation and order made under this Part shall
be laid before each House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be afterit is made.
(2) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which a regulation or an order was laid before itin accordance with subsection (1) , pass a resolution annulling the
regulation or order, as the case may be.
(3) The annulment under subsection (2) of a regulation or order
takes effect immediately on the passing of the resolution concerned,but does not affect anything that was done under it before the pass-ing of the resolution.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
142.—(1) Subject to the exceptions mentioned in subsection (3) ,a
person shall not keep or have in his or her possession anywhere inthe territory of the State a television set save in so far as such keepingor possession is authorised by a television licence for the time beingin force.
(2) A person having possession of a television set under a tele-
vision licence shall not keep such a television set otherwise than inaccordance with the terms and conditions subject to which suchlicence is expressly, or is by virtue of this Part deemed to havebeen granted.
(3) This section does not apply to a television set, which is of a
class or description for the time being declared by an order of theMinister to be a class or description of television set to which thissection is not to apply.
143.—(1) The Minister may, subject to this Part and on payment
of the prescribed fee (if any) grant to any person a licence(“television licence”) to keep and have possession of a television setin a premises or specified place in the territory of the State.
(2) Every television licence shall be in such form, continue in
force for such period, and be subject to such conditions and restric-tions (including conditions as to suspension and revocation) as pre-scribed in regulations made under section 144 .
(3) On the passing of this Act section 5 of the Act of 1926 does
not apply to television sets.
(4) All licences for the keeping and possession of a television set
(within the meaning of section 1 of the Act of 1972) which weregranted under section 5 of the Act of 1926 and are in force on thepassing of this Act continue in force for the remainder of their periodof validity and are deemed to have been granted under this sectionand this Part applies to all such licences accordingly.
144.—(1) The Minister may make regulations prescribing in
relation to all television licences or any particular class or classes oftelevision licences in respect of premises or specified places generallyor different classes of such, all or any of the matters following, thatis to say:
(a) the form of a licence,
(b) the period during which a licence continues in force,
(c) the manner in which, the terms on which, and the period
or periods for which a licence may be renewed,
(d) the circumstances in which or the terms under which the
licence is granted,
(e) the terms and conditions to be observed by the holder of
a licence and subject to which the licence is deemed tobe granted,
(f) the circumstances and manner in which a licence may be
amended, suspended or revoked by the Minister,
147Pt.9
Restrictions on
possession oftelevision set.
Grant of television
licences.
Regulations in
regard to televisionlicences.Pt.9 S.144
Issue of television
licences by agent.
148[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(g) the fees to be paid on the grant or renewal of a licence,
including any discount of fees, and the time and mannerat and in which such fees are to be paid, and
(h) matters which a licence does not entitle or authorise the
licence holder to do.
(2) Where regulations are made under this section prescribing
fees to be paid on the grant of a television licence, different fees maybe prescribed in respect of licences granted in relation to differentclasses of premises or specified places and the number of televisionsets kept in the premises or specified place to which the televisionlicence relates.
(3) No regulation shall be made under this section in relation to
fees without the previous consent of the Minister for Finance.
(4) On the passing of this Act section 6 of the Act of 1926 does
not apply in relation to television licences and any regulations madeunder that section before such passing and which are in force on suchpassing in relation to television licences continue as if made underthis section.
145.—(1) In this section “issuing agent” means An Post or
another person designated by the Minister under subsection (3) .
(2) Subject to subsection (12) , an issuing agent may, on payment
of the appropriate licence fee, issue on behalf of the Minister a tele-vision licence in accordance with this Part.
(3) The Minister may by order designate a person other than An
Post to be an issuing agent for the purposes of this section other thansubsection (12).
(4) An issuing agent may—
(a) collect fees in respect of television licences, and
(b) identify persons who have television sets not authorised
by a licence for the time being in force,
on such terms and conditions as the Minister may decide.
(5) Summary proceedings may be brought and prosecuted by an
issuing agent for an offence under section 147(3) or148.
(6) An issuing agent shall maintain and furnish such data and
information, and in such format (including electronic formats), as theMinister may require in relation to the exercise of powers conferredon the issuing agent under this Part.
(7) An issuing agent shall pay to the Minister such amounts aris-
ing in relation to the collection by the issuing agent of fees due inrespect of the issue of television licences.
(8) An issuing agent shall pay to the Minister promptly the
amounts collected by the issuing agent in respect of the issue of tele-vision licences.
(9) The Minister shall pay to an issuing agent an appropriate sum
in respect of work done by the issuing agent in the exercise of powersconferred on the issuing agent under this Part.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(10) The appropriate sum payable by the Minister to an issuing
agent and the manner in which and the intervals at which it is tobe paid shall be decided by the Minister after consultation with theissuing agent.
(11) An issuing agent may, with the consent of the Minister,
appoint a sub-agent to perform any acts and exercise any powers(other than subsection (5) ) authorised by this Part to be performed
or exercised by the issuing agent.
(12) The Department of Social and Family Affairs may issue on
behalf of the Minister a television licence to a person who, in accord-ance with the scheme administered by the Minister for Social andFamily Affairs known as a Free Television Licence or any schemeamending or replacing that scheme, is entitled to a television licenceunder that scheme.
(13) The Department of Social and Family Affairs may, with the
consent of the Minister, appoint an agent to issue a television licencefor the purposes of subsection (12) .
(14) Anything commenced before the passing of this Act by or
under the authority of the Minister may, in so far as it relates to thefunctions under this section, be carried on or completed on or aftersuch commencement by an issuing agent.
146.—(1) An issuing agent may appoint persons to be officers of
the issuing agent for the purposes of this Part.
(2) A person appointed under subsection (1) shall, on his or her
appointment be furnished by the issuing agent with a certificate ofhis or her appointment and when exercising a power conferred bysubsection (3) shall, if requested by any person thereby affected,
produce such certificate to that person for inspection.
(3) An officer of an issuing agent may enter at any reasonable
time any premises or specified place for the purposes of ascertainingwhether there is a television set there and a television licence is forthe time being in force in respect of the premises or specified placeauthorising the keeping of a television set at the premises or speci-fied place.
(4) An officer of an issuing agent may request any person on the
premises or at the place where he or she finds a television set orevidence of such to produce the television licence for the time beingin force in respect of the premises or specified place for inspectionby the officer.
147.—(1) An officer of an issuing agent may, if and whenever he
or she thinks proper so to do, cause a special notice in writing(accompanied by or having annexed to it a form of declaration) to
be given personally to, or be served by registered post on, any personrequiring that person, within 28 days after the service of the noticeon him or her—
(a) to state on the form of declaration such one or more of
the matters mentioned below as specified in the notice,
(b) to sign and otherwise complete the declaration, and
149Pt.9 S.145
Request to show
television licence.
Statutory
declaration.Pt.9 S.147
Offences for not
having televisionlicence.
Reminder
notification andfixed paymentnotice.
150[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(c) to give it or send it by post to a specified officer of the
issuing agent.
(2) The matters which a person may be required under this
section to state in a declaration are—
(a) whether he or she does or does not keep or has or has not
in his or her possession a television set,
(b) if he or she keeps or has in his or her possession a tele-
vision set, the premises or specified place at which he orshe keeps or has the same,
(c) whether he or she has or has not a television licence then
in force,
(d) if he or she has such a licence, the number, date or other
identifying information in respect of such licence, and
(e) any other matter relating to the possession of a television
set or any apparatus used in conjunction with it.
(3) Every person on whom a notice is duly served under this
section shall within the time mentioned duly and correctly completein accordance with the notice and this section the form of declarationaccompanying or annexed to the notice and give or send the declar-ation to the officer named in that behalf in the notice. If the personmakes in it any statement which is to his or her knowledge false ormisleading he or she commits an offence and is liable on summaryconviction to a fine not exceeding \1,000.
(4) Where a person fails or neglects, within 28 days of service, to
duly complete the form of declaration accompanied or annexed to anotice given or sent to him, it shall be presumed, unless the contraryis shown, that he or she keeps or has possession of a television setat the premises or specified place to which the notice relates and atelevision licence is not in force in relation to the premises or speci-fied place authorising the keeping or having possession of a tele-vision set at the premises or specified place.
(5) On the passing of this Act section 7 of the Act of 1926 does
not apply to television sets.
148.—A person who keeps, has in his or her possession or uses a
television set in contravention of section 142 commits an offence and
is liable on summary conviction—
(a) in the case of a first such offence, to a fine not exceeding
\1,000, and
(b) in the case of a second or subsequent such offence, to a
fine not exceeding \2,000.
149.—(1) An officer of the issuing agent may, if and whenever he
or she thinks proper so to do, send by post or deliver personally anotification in writing (“reminder notification”) to any person whomhe or she believes to keep or be in possession of a television set at apremises or specified place other than in accordance with a televisionlicence pointing out the requirements of section 142 .[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) Where an officer of an issuing agent has reasonable grounds
for believing that a person is committing or has committed an offenceunder section 148 he or she may, subject to subsection (4), serve the
person personally or by post with a notice (“fixed payment notice”)in the prescribed form, stating that—
(a) the person is alleged to have committed the offence, and
(b) the person may during the period of 21 days beginning on
the date of the notice make to the issuing agent at theaddress specified in the notice a payment of the appro-priate amount specified in the notice, and accompaniedby the notice and evidence of having obtained a tele-vision licence in respect of a premises or specified placeto which the notice relates, and
(c) a prosecution in respect of the alleged offence shall not be
instituted during the period specified in the notice, and—
(i) if the payment specified in the notice is made during
that period, and
(ii) evidence of having obtained a valid television licence
in respect of a specified premises or place to whichthe notice relates is given,
no prosecution in respect of the alleged offence shall be
instituted.
(3) Where notice is given under subsection (2) —
(a) the person to whom the notice applies may, during the
period specified in the notice, make to the issuing agentat the address specified in the notice the payment speci-fied in the notice accompanied by the notice and evidenceof having obtained a television licence in respect of apremises or specified place to which the notice relates,
(b) the issuing agent specified in the notice may receive the
payment, issue a receipt for it and retain the money paid,and any payment received shall not be recoverable by theperson who made it, and
(c) a prosecution in respect of the alleged offence shall not be
instituted in the period specified in the notice, and—
(i) if the payment specified is made during that period,
and
(ii) evidence of having obtained a valid television licence
in respect of a specified premises or place to whichthe notice relates is given,
no prosecution in respect of the alleged offence shall be
instituted.
(4) A fixed payment notice shall not be served on the person
unless at least 2 reminder notifications have issued to the personand until—
(a) a period of 28 days has elapsed since the issue of the first
reminder notification, and
151Pt.9 S.149Pt.9 S.149
Reminder
notification —effective date oftelevision licenceand recovery oflicence fees.
Prosecution of
offences.
152[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) subsequent to that period, a period of 28 days has elapsed
since the issue of the second reminder notification.
(5) Any payment made to the issuing agent under paragraph (a)
ofsubsection (3) shall be paid into or disposed of for the benefit of
the Exchequer in such manner as the Minister for Finance maydirect.
(6) In a prosecution for an offence under section 148 the onus of
proving that a payment pursuant to a notice under this section hasbeen made lies on the defendant.
(7) In this section “the appropriate amount” means—
(a) an amount being one third of the amount of the television
licence fee rounded down to the nearest whole euroamount, or
(b) where that amount is greater than one third of the
maximum amount of the fine to which the person is liableon summary conviction under section 148 , such amount
being not more than one third of the amount of that fineas prescribed and different amounts may be prescribed inrespect of different classes of television licences.
150.—(1) Where a person has received a first reminder notifi-
cation and the person—
(a) has held a television licence, within the 12 month period
previous to the reminder notification, in respect of keep-ing or possessing a television set at the premises or placeto which the notification relates, any renewal of thelicence takes effect from the expiration of the previouslicence, unless the person can satisfy the issuing agentthat he or she was not in possession of a television set atthe premises or place during the material time after theexpiration of the previous licence, or
(b) has not held such a licence, any television licence obtained
by the person to keep or have possession of a televisionset at the premises or place takes effect from the date ofthe notification or such later date as the issuing agentmay decide.
(2) Where a person having received a first reminder notification
obtains a television licence after the notification, which is not inaccordance with subsection (1) , to keep and have possession of a
television set at the premises or place specified in the notification,the licence is deemed to have effect from the date of expiration ofthe previous licence or the first notification or such later date as theissuing agent may decide, as the case may be. The issuing agent mayalter accordingly any licence so obtained.
(3) An issuing agent may recover, as a simple contract debt in any
court of competent jurisdiction, any fee owing by a person in respectof a television licence which has not been obtained by the person tokeep or possess a television set at a specified premises or place atany material time.
151.—(1) Summary proceedings for an offence under this Part
may be brought by the Minister or the issuing agent concerned.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) In a prosecution for an offence under section 148 in which it
is shown that a television set was in a particular premises or specifiedplace on a particular day, it shall be presumed, until the contrary isshown by the defendant, that on that day the television set was inthe possession of the person who was then the occupier of the prem-ises or specified place.
(3) In a prosecution for an offence under section 148 in which it
appears that a person kept or had in his or her possession a televisionset at the time to which the prosecution relates, it shall be presumed,until the contrary is shown by the defendant, that he or she did notat such time hold a television licence then having effect and licensinghim or her to keep or have in his or her possession the television setto which the prosecution relates.
(4) In a prosecution for an offence under section 148 in which it
is shown that a notice under section 147 has been sent by registered
post it shall be presumed, until the contrary is shown by the defend-ant, that the person to whom the notice was so sent has not compliedwith the requirements of that section.
(5) In this section “occupier” in relation to premises, means a per-
son who as owner, tenant or otherwise is in occupation, whethersolely, jointly or severally, of the premises.
(6) Where an offence under this Part which has been committed
by a body corporate is proved to have been committed with the con-sent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on thepart of, a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of thebody corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in any suchcapacity, he or she, as well as the body corporate, commits thatoffence and is liable to be proceeded against accordingly.
152.—(1) Section 9 of the Act of 1988 is amended in subsection
(5) by substituting for the definition of “television set” the following:
“ ‘television set’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 140 of
theBroadcasting Act 2009 .”.
(2) Section 2(1) of the Communications Regulation Act 2002 is
amended by substituting for the definition of “television set” thefollowing:
“ ‘television set’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 140 of
theBroadcasting Act 2009 ;”.
PART 10
Broadcasting Fund
153.—In this Part—
“appropriate network provider” means a body referred to in
section 77(1) ;
“free television service” means a television broadcasting service for
the reception of which no charge is made by the person providingthe service, and reception of which is available to at least 90 per centof the population of the State;
153Pt.9 S.151
Miscellaneous
amendments.
Definitions ( Part
10).Pt.10 S.153
Broadcasting
funding scheme.
154[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“programme material” means audio-visual or audio material, includ-
ing advertising and similar material, which was broadcast in wholeor in part or was recorded for broadcast, and includes stills andphotographs produced from such material or in the context of therecording of such material;
“scheme” means a scheme prepared under section 154 .
154.—(1) The Authority shall prepare and submit to the Minister
for his or her approval a scheme or a number of schemes for thegranting of funds to support all or any of the following—
(a) new television or sound broadcasting programmes includ-
ing feature films, animation and drama on Irish culture,heritage and experience, including—
(i) history (including history relating to particular areas,
groups or aspects of experience, activity orinfluence),
(ii) historical buildings,
(iii) the natural environment,
(iv) folk, rural and vernacular heritage,
(v) traditional and contemporary arts,
(vi) the Irish language, and
(vii) the Irish experience in European and international
contexts,
(b) new television or sound broadcasting programmes to
improve adult or media literacy,
(c) new television or sound broadcasting programmes which
raise public awareness and understanding of global issuesimpacting on the State and countries other than the State,
(d) programmes under paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)in the
Irish language,
(e) the development of archiving of programme material pro-
duced in the State, and
(f) such ancillary measures as are necessary to support
schemes prepared under paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or(d).
(2) A scheme—
(a) may only fund television programmes under subsection (1)
which are broadcast—
(i) on a free television service which provides near uni-
versal coverage in the State, or
(ii) on an appropriate network provider or MMD system
as part of a community content provision contractunder section 72 ,[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
and which, other than in the case of programmes for chil-
dren or educational programmes or programmes in theIrish language broadcast by commercial and communitybroadcasters, are broadcast during peak viewing times,
(b) may only fund sound broadcasting programmes under sub-
section (1) which are carried on sound broadcasting
services under a contract made by the Authority oroperated by RTE ´and which, other than in the case of
programmes for children or educational programmes orprogrammes in the Irish language broadcast by commer-cial and community broadcasters, are broadcast duringpeak listening times,
(c) may provide funding for projects relating to matters such
as research, needs assessments, analyses, feasibility stud-ies and pilot projects in relation to subsection (1)(e) ,
including such projects undertaken by or on behalf of theMinister, and
(d) may not provide funding for programmes which are pro-
duced primarily for news or current affairs.
(3) A scheme may provide—
(a) for the making of applications by persons for funding
under a scheme,
(b) general terms and conditions of funding, or
(c) that funding in a particular year will be directed at—
(i) particular classes of television or sound broadcasting
programmes referred to in subsection (1) including
but not limited to programmes of a specified natureor subject matter, or broadcast by means of a part-icular medium (including media of a local or regionalnature such as local or community television orradio), or
(ii) particular classes of projects referred to in subsection
(1)(e) .
(4) The Authority may attach to any particular funding under a
scheme such particular terms or conditions as it considers appro-priate in the circumstances.
(5) The Authority in preparing a scheme, may have regard to the
developmental needs of community broadcasters.
(6) The Authority, in preparing a scheme, shall have regard to the
understanding and enjoyment of television programmes under thescheme by persons who are deaf or hard of hearing.
(7) The Minister may direct the Authority—
(a) to prepare and submit to him or her a scheme relating to
any matter in subsection (1) ,o r
(b) to amend or revoke a scheme.
The Authority shall comply with the direction.
155Pt.10 S.154Pt.10 S.154
Objectives of
scheme.
156[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(8) Any amendment or revocation of a scheme shall be submitted
by the Authority to the Minister for his or her approval.
(9) A scheme shall, if approved of by the Minister, be—
(a) published (including publication by electronic means cap-
able of being read in legible form), and
(b) carried out in accordance with its terms,
by the Authority.
(10) ( a) A scheme shall be laid before each House of the
Oireachtas by the Minister as soon as may be after itis made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, within 21 sitting days
after the day on which a scheme was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph (a) , pass a resolution annul-
ling the scheme.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of a scheme takes
effect immediately on the passing of the resolution con-cerned but does not affect anything that was done undera scheme before the passing of the resolution.
(11) On the passing of this Act any scheme made by the BCI
and approved by the Minister under section 2 of the Broadcasting(Funding) Act 2003 which is in force on such passing continues andis deemed to have been made and approved under this section.
155.—(1) The objectives of a scheme in relation to programmes
referred to in section 154(1)(a) are to—
(a) develop high quality programmes based on Irish culture,
heritage and experience,
(b) develop these programmes in the Irish language,
(c) increase the availability of programmes referred to in
paragraphs (a) and (b)to audiences in the State,
(d) represent the diversity of Irish culture and heritage,
(e) record oral Irish heritage and aspects of Irish heritage
which are disappearing, under threat, or have not beenpreviously recorded, and
(f) develop local and community broadcasting.
(2) The objective of a scheme in relation to the development of
archiving of programme material produced in the State referred toinsection 154(1)(e) is to develop an integrated approach to the
archiving of programme material, including the development of suit-able storage processes and formats and the accessing of material byinterested parties and reflecting the obligations of the Authority asset out in subsections (6) ,(7),(8)and (9)ofsection 69 .
(3) The Authority, in preparing a scheme and in considering
applications for funding, shall have regard to the objectives of ascheme.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
156.—(1) In this section “net receipts” in relation to the receipt
of television licence fees, means the total receipts less any expensesin respect of those receipts certified by the Minister as having beenincurred by him or her in that year in relation to the collection ofthe fees.
(2) The Minister, with the approval of the Minister for Finance,
may pay to the Authority out of monies provided by the Oireachtasfor the purposes of grants under a scheme and any administration ofor reasonable expenses relating to a scheme, in respect of each finan-cial year, an amount being equal to 7 per cent of net receipts in thatyear in respect of television licence fees.
(3) The Minister, with the approval of the Minister for Finance,
may from time to time pay to the Authority out of monies providedby the Oireachtas such an amount as he or she determines to bereasonable for the purposes of grants under a scheme and anyadministration of or reasonable expenses relating to a scheme.
157.—(1) The Authority shall establish and maintain on the estab-
lishment day a fund which shall be known as the Broadcasting Fundand is referred to in this Part as the “Fund”.
(2) The Fund shall be managed and controlled by the Authority
and shall consist of a current account (“current account”) and aninvestment account (“investment account”).
(3) There shall be paid into the current account all monies paid
to the Authority under section 156(2) and (3)and there shall be paid
out of the current account all monies in respect of expenditure bythe Authority for the purposes of grants under, and any admini-stration of or reasonable expenses relating to, a scheme dulyapproved under section 154 .
(4) Monies standing to the credit of the current account and not
required to meet current liabilities shall be paid into the investmentaccount of the Fund.
(5) Whenever the monies in the current account of the Fund are
not sufficient to meet the current liabilities of that account, thereshall be paid into that account from the investment account of theFund such monies as are necessary to meet those liabilities.
(6) Monies in the investment account of the Fund that are not
required to meet current and prospective liabilities of that accountshall be invested and the investments shall be realised or varied fromtime to time as occasion requires and the proceeds of any such realis-ation, and any income received in respect of monies invested underthis subsection, shall be paid into the investment account of the Fundor invested under this subsection.
(7) The costs of administration of the Fund incurred by the Auth-
ority shall be defrayed from the resources of the Fund.
(8) The Authority shall keep all proper and usual accounts of all
monies paid into the Fund and of all disbursements from the Fundincluding an income and expenditure account, cash-flow statementand balance sheet.
(9) As soon as may be after the end of each financial year of the
Authority, the Authority shall submit the accounts of the Fund tothe Comptroller and Auditor General for audit and the Minister
157Pt.10
Amounts to be paid
by Minister toscheme.
Broadcasting fund.Pt.10 S.157
Reviews of scheme.
Winding-up and
dissolution ofscheme.
158[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
shall cause a copy of an abstract of the accounts as so audited
together with a copy of the report of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral thereon to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(10) As soon as may be, but not later than 3 months, after the
end of each financial year of the Authority, the Authority shall makea report, in such a manner as the Minister may direct, to the Ministerwith respect to the operation by it of the Fund during that financialyear and the Minister shall cause copies of the report to be laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas.
158.—(1) The Authority shall review the operation, effectiveness
and impact of a scheme not later than 3 years from the passing ofthis Act, and every 3 years thereafter, or at such other time as maybe requested by the Minister, and make a written report to the Mini-ster on the review.
(2) A copy of a report under subsection (1) shall be laid by the
Minister before each House of the Oireachtas, as soon as may be,after it has been made to him or her.
(3) The Minister shall publish (including publication by electronic
means capable of being read in legible form) a report made to himor her under subsection (1) .
159.—(1) The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for
Finance, direct the Authority to wind-up, where there is only onescheme, the scheme or, where there is more than one scheme, allschemes, and the Fund established under section 157 and to pay to
the Minister any monies remaining in respect of the Fund. The Mini-ster shall pay to RTE ´any such monies paid to him or her.
(2) Where the Minister directs that the scheme or all schemes, as
the case may be, and the Fund be wound up in accordance withsubsection (1) , he or she shall upon being satisfied that the scheme
has or the schemes have and the Fund has been wound up in accord-ance with that subsection, by order (in this section referred to as a“dissolution order”) dissolve the scheme or schemes and the Fund.
(3) Upon the commencement of a dissolution order no further
scheme may be made under section 154 .
(4) ( a) A dissolution order shall be laid before each of the Houses
of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable after it is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may, by resolution passed
within 21 sitting days after the day on which a dissolutionorder was laid before it in accordance with paragraph (a) ,
pass a resolution annulling the order.
(c) The annulment under paragraph (b) of a dissolution order
takes effect immediately on the passing of the resolutionconcerned, but does not affect anything that was doneunder the order before the passing of the resolution.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
PART 11
Major Events Television Coverage
160.—(1) In this Part—
“broadcaster” has the meaning assigned to it in the Council
Directive;
“designated” means designated by a designation order;“designation order” means an order under section 162 ;
“event” means an event of interest to the general public in the Euro-
pean Union, a Member State or in the State or in a significant partof the State that is organised by an event organiser who is legallyentitled to sell the broadcasting rights to the event and includes thewhole event or where part of it has already taken place theremainder;
“event organiser” means the person who is legally entitled to sell the
rights to the event;
“free television service” means a television broadcasting service for
the reception of which no charge is made at anytime by the personproviding the service, and which is available on a free-to-air basis;
“near universal coverage” means—
(a) free television service, reception of which is available to at
least 95 per cent of the population of the State, or
(b) if at any time fewer than three broadcasters are able to
provide the coverage required under paragraph (a) , free
television service, reception of which is available to atleast 90 per cent of the population of the State;
“qualifying broadcaster” means a broadcaster who is deemed under
subsection (2) to be a qualifying broadcaster;
“rights” in relation to the broadcast of a designated event, means the
exclusive or non-exclusive rights to broadcast the event;
“television broadcasting” has the meaning assigned in the Council
Directive.
(2) A broadcaster who provides near universal coverage of a des-
ignated event is deemed to be a qualifying broadcaster.
(3) For the purpose of subsection (2) , two or more broadcasters
who enter into a contract or arrangement to jointly provide nearuniversal coverage of a designated event shall be deemed to be asingle broadcaster with respect to that event.
(4) A broadcaster may request the Minister to resolve any dispute
as to the extent of a free television service being provided by abroadcaster in the State for the purpose of subsection (2) and the
definition of “near universal coverage” in subsection (1) .
(5) The Minister may consult with any technical experts or other
persons or bodies he or she considers appropriate before resolving adispute under subsection (4) .
159Definitions ( Part
11).Pt.11
Application.
Designation of
major events.
160[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
161.—This Part applies to a designated event which is designated,
before or after 22 April 2003, whether or not any agreement orarrangement has been entered into between the event organiser anda broadcaster in respect of the acquisition by the broadcaster ofrights to the event, and where such an agreement or arrangementhas been entered into before 22 April 2003, in respect of those rights,it was entered into after the publication of the Council Directiveconcerning an event which takes place after 13 November 1999(being the date Article 3j of the Council Directive was given effectto by this Part).
162.—(1) The Minister may by order—
(a) designate events as events of major importance to society
for which the right of a qualifying broadcaster to providecoverage on free television services should be providedin the public interest, and
(b) determine whether coverage on free television services of
an event designated under paragraph (a) should be
available—
(i) on a live, deferred or both live and deferred basis, and
(ii) in whole, in part or both in whole and in part.
(2) The Minister shall have regard to all the circumstances and in
particular each of the following criteria in making a designationunder subsection (1)(a) :
(a) the extent to which the event has a special general reson-
ance for the people of Ireland, and
(b) the extent to which the event has a generally recognised
distinct cultural importance for the people of Ireland.
(3) In order to determine the extent to which the criteria in sub-
section (2) have been met, the following factors may be taken into
account by the Minister:
(a) whether the event involves participation by a national or
non-national team or by Irish persons;
(b) past practice or experience with regard to television cover-
age of the event or similar events.
(4) The Minister shall consider the following in making the deter-
mination under subsection (1)(b) :
(a) the nature of the event,
(b) the time within the State at which the event takes place,
and
(c) practical broadcasting considerations.
(5) The Minister shall consult with the Minister for Arts, Sport
and Tourism before making, revoking or amending an order underthis section.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(6) Where it is proposed to make, revoke or amend an order
under this section, a draft of the order shall be laid before eachHouse of the Oireachtas and the order shall not be made until aresolution approving the draft has been passed by each House.
(7) On the passing of this Act any order made under section 2 of
the Broadcasting (Major Events Television Coverage) Act 1999which is in force on such passing continues and is deemed to havebeen made under this section.
163.—(1) Before making a designation order, the Minister shall—
(a) make reasonable efforts to consult with the organisers of
the event and with broadcasters who are under the juris-diction of the State for the purpose of the CouncilDirective,
(b) publish a notice of the event which the Minister intends to
designate under that section on a website maintained byhim or her and where appropriate in a newspaper circul-ating in the State, and
(c) invite comments on the intended designation from
members of the public.
(2) The inability to establish who is the organiser of an event or
the failure of the organiser or a broadcaster under the jurisdiction ofthe State to respond to the Minister’s efforts to consult shall notpreclude the making of a designation order.
164.—(1) Where a broadcaster under the jurisdiction of the State
who is not a qualifying broadcaster acquires exclusive rights tobroadcast a designated event, that broadcaster shall not broadcastthe event unless the event has been made available to a qualifyingbroadcaster, in accordance with the designation order concerned, onrequest and the payment of reasonable market rates by the qualify-ing broadcaster.
(2) Where a qualifying broadcaster acquires the right to broadcast
a designated event (under this section or directly) the qualifyingbroadcaster shall broadcast the event on a free television service pro-viding near universal coverage in accordance with the designationorder concerned.
(3) In this section, “designated event” means an event that is des-
ignated in a designation order.
165.—Where another Member State has designated an event as
being of major importance to society in that Member State and theEuropean Commission has communicated the measures taken bythat Member State in accordance with Article 3j.2 of the CouncilDirective, no broadcaster under the jurisdiction of the State whoacquires exclusive rights to the designated event shall exercise theexclusive rights in such a way that a substantial portion of the publicin that Member State is deprived of the possibility of following theevents in accordance with the measures taken.
166.—(1) Where it is alleged by a broadcaster (the “aggrieved
broadcaster”) that any activity or conduct prohibited by section 164
161Pt.11 S.162
Consultation.
Broadcasters’ duties
with respect todesignated events.
Broadcasters’ duties
with respect toMember Stateevents.
Civil remedies.Pt.11 S.166
Reasonable market
rates.
Qualifying
broadcaster mayapply to High Courtto obtain rightsfrom eventorganiser to providecoverage ofdesignated event onfree televisionservices in State,etc.
162[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
or165is being, has been or is about to be carried on by one or more
other broadcasters (the “other broadcaster”), the aggrieved broad-caster shall be entitled to apply to the High Court for the followingremedies against the other broadcaster:
(a) an order restraining the other broadcaster from carrying
on or attempting to carry on the activity or conduct pro-hibited by section 164 or165;
(b) a declaration that the contract under which the other
broadcaster received exclusive rights to the designatedevent is void;
(c) damages from the other broadcaster;
(d) a direction that the right to provide television coverage of
the event shall be offered to the aggrieved broadcaster atreasonable market rates.
(2) An application to the High Court for an order referred to in
subsection (1) shall be by motion and the Court, when considering
the matter, may make such interim or interlocutory order as it con-siders appropriate.
167.—(1) For the purpose of section 164(1) , if broadcasters are
unable to agree on what constitutes reasonable market rates withrespect to television coverage of an event, either of the broadcastersmay apply to the High Court in a summary manner for an orderdetermining reasonable market rates for an event.
(2) An order under subsection (1) may contain such consequential
or supplementary provisions as the High Court considersappropriate.
168.—(1) Where an event has been designated, and if within 56
days, or such other lesser or greater period which the Ministerdirects, before the event or a part of it takes place the event organiserhas not made an agreement or arrangement with a qualifying broad-caster to enable it to provide coverage on free television services inthe State of the event or part of it, as determined under section
162(1)(b) in the designation order which designated the event—
(a) subject to subsection (3) , a qualifying broadcaster may
apply to the High Court in a summary manner for anorder directing the event organiser to give rights to thequalifying broadcaster to provide such coverage and
upon such terms as are fixed by the High Court, includingthe fixing of reasonable market rates, in respect of theacquisition of the rights, or
(b) within that period a qualifying broadcaster has not so
applied, the event organiser may apply to the High Courtin a summary manner to request the High Court to invitequalifying broadcasters to make such an application.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the High Court may, on application
to it under subsection (1) by a qualifying broadcaster, direct the event
organiser, upon such terms as to the Court appears just and proper,to give to the qualifying broadcaster rights to provide coverage of[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
the designated event or part of it on free television services, as deter-
mined under section 162(1)(b) in the designation order which desig-
nated the event, notwithstanding that all of the terms for the acquis-ition of the rights to provide coverage under subsection (1) , have not
yet been fixed by it, including the fixing of reasonable market rates.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply where an event organiser
decides, prior to the making of an application under subsection (1) ,
not to allow coverage of an event or a part of it, as determined undersection 162(1)(b) in the designation order designating the event, on
any television service provided by a broadcaster. Where an eventorganiser has so decided, the event organiser must notify, as soon aspossible, the Minister.
(4) The High Court in fixing the terms under subsection (1) may,
in arriving at a computation of reasonable market rates, to be paidby a qualifying broadcaster for the acquisition of the rights underthat subsection, refer the computation of the rates to an arbitratorappointed by the High Court. The arbitrator shall report to the Courtand the parties, by way of issuing an award, setting out the amountthat he or she decides are reasonable market rates.
(5) An arbitration under subsection (4) shall be conducted in
accordance with such procedures as are determined by the Courtreferring the computation of the rates to the arbitrator. The Courtmay, in determining such procedures, give such directions as it con-siders just and proper for the processing of the arbitration, includingfixing the period within which the award of the arbitrator is to beissued.
(6) Where in an application under subsection (1) —
(a) the High Court has fixed the reasonable market rates, or
an arbitrator has issued an award under subsection (4) ,
and prior to the High Court making a final order inrespect of the application, or
(b) in the circumstances referred to in subsection (2) , the High
Court indicates that it will fix the reasonable market ratesfor coverage of the event after the event has taken place,and prior to the event taking place,
the qualifying broadcaster may withdraw the application. The High
Court may in these circumstances, having regard to the intention ofthe broadcaster making the application, award such costs to suchparty or parties to the application as it considers appropriate.
(7) The High Court may, either of its own motion or on appli-
cation to it by an arbitrator appointed under subsection (4) , give,
from time to time, such directions in connection with the arbitrationas it considers just and proper.
(8) Where more than one qualifying broadcaster applies under
subsection (1) for rights to provide coverage of a designated event
or part of it and the High Court has fixed under this section theterms upon which a qualifying broadcaster may obtain the rights, theevent organiser may choose to which qualifying broadcaster it givesthe rights.
(9) Where there is an existing contract in respect of an event or
part of it between the event organiser and another broadcaster, whois not a qualifying broadcaster, the High Court in an application to
163Pt.11 S.168Pt.11 S.168
Arbitration in
respect ofreasonable marketrates where eventorganiser is willingto sell broadcastingrights to designatedevent to qualifyingbroadcaster.
Criteria for
determiningreasonable marketrates.
164[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
it under subsection (1) shall decide to whom and in which pro-
portions monies in respect of the reasonable market rates, fixedunder this section in respect of the acquisition of rights to the eventor part of it, should be paid.
(10) The High Court may, if it considers it necessary, for the pur-
poses of exercising its powers under this section, adjust an existingagreement or arrangement, in respect of rights to a designated eventor a part of it, between the event organiser and a broadcaster, whois not a qualifying broadcaster.
(11) Without prejudice to subsection (2) , when considering any
matter under this section, the High Court may make such interim orinterlocutory order as it considers appropriate.
169.—(1) Where an event organiser is willing to sell rights
enabling a qualifying broadcaster to provide coverage on free tele-vision services in the State of a designated event or a part of it, asdetermined under section 162(1)(b) in the designation order which
designated the event, but the qualifying broadcaster and the eventorganiser have not agreed the amount to be paid in respect of theacquisition of the rights, the following provisions of this sectionapply.
(2) The qualifying broadcaster or the event organiser may request
the other to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator for the pur-poses of fixing reasonable market rates for the acquisition of therights referred to in subsection (1) . In default of agreement, on the
appointment of an arbitrator by the parties, the Minister may appointan arbitrator, who he or she considers to be suitably qualified in thisregard, within 21 days of being notified by either party of suchdefault.
(3) An arbitrator appointed under subsection (2) shall issue his or
her award, in writing, which, subject to subsection (4) , shall be a
provisional award. The arbitrator shall notify the parties concernedof the award.
(4) An award issued under subsection (3) is not binding on the
qualifying broadcaster concerned unless, within the period of 21 daysfrom the date of issuing of the award of the arbitrator under subsec-
tion (3) , the qualifying broadcaster has notified the event organiser
concerned of the qualifying broadcaster’s acceptance of the award.
170.—In determining that which constitutes reasonable market
rates or terms for the purposes of this Act, the High Court or anarbitrator shall have regard to, inter alia —
(a) previous fees (if any) for the event or similar events,
(b) time of day for live coverage of the event,
(c) the period for which rights are offered,
(d) the revenue potential associated with the live or deferred
coverage of the event,
(e) the purposes of Article 3j of the Council Directive and
the rights conferred on Member States of the EuropeanCommunities to regulate the exercise of broadcastingrights, and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(f) such other matters as may appear to be relevant.
171.—(1) The Minister may, where he or she considers it is in the
public interest, direct an event organiser who has entered into anagreement or arrangement with a broadcaster in respect of thebroadcasting rights to a designated event to give to the Minister, atthe Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources,within such period specified in the direction, a copy of the agreementor arrangement.
(2) Where an agreement or arrangement referred to in subsection
(1)is not in writing, the event organiser must, upon receiving a direc-
tion of the Minister, notify the Minister of the agreement or arrange-ment and set out all its terms and conditions.
172.—(1) Where a direction or notification is required under this
Part to be given to a person, it shall be in writing, addressed to theperson and given to the person in one of the following ways—
(a) by delivering it to the person,
(b) by leaving it at the address at which the person ordinarily
carries on business,
(c) by sending it by post in a pre-paid registered letter
addressed to the person at the address at which the per-son ordinarily carries on business,
(d) if an address for the service of directions or notifications
has been furnished by the person, by leaving it at, orsending it by pre-paid registered post addressed to theperson at that address,
(e) in any case where the person giving the direction or notifi-
cation considers that the immediate giving of it isrequired, by sending it, by means of electronic mail or afacsimile machine, to a device or facility for the receptionof electronic mail or facsimiles located at the address atwhich the person ordinarily carries on business or, if anaddress for the service of directions or notifications hasbeen furnished by the person, that address, but only if—
(i) the sender’s—
(I) facility for the reception of electronic mail gener-
ates a message confirming a receipt of the elec-tronic mail, or
(II) facsimile machine generates a message con-
firming successful transmission of the totalnumber of pages of the direction or notification,
and
(ii) the direction or notification is also given in one of the
other ways mentioned in any of the precedingparagraphs.
(2) For the purposes of this section—
165Pt.11 S.170
Obligation to give
copy of agreementor arrangement tobroadcasting rightsto Minister.
Service of directions
and notification.Pt.11 S.172
Review of
designated events.
Dissolution of BCI
and saver.
Dissolution of BCC
and saver.
Transitional
provisions — BCI.
166[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) a company registered under the Companies Acts is
deemed to carry on business at its registered office, andevery other body corporate and unincorporated body isdeemed to carry on business at its principal office orplace of business, and
(b) the Minister is deemed to carry on business at the Depart-
ment of Communications, Energy and NaturalResources.
173.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Minister shall review, from
time to time, designated events and the designation of events undersection 162 .
(2) A review under subsection (1) shall be not later than 3 years
after the preceding review under section 9 of the Broadcasting(Major Events Television Coverage) (Amendment) Act 2003 andevery 3 years after that.
PART 12
Transitional Provisions
174.—(1) On the establishment day the BCI is dissolved.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Radio and Television Act
1988, the Act of 2001, the Broadcasting (Funding) Act 2003, theBroadcasting (Amendment) Act 2007 or any other enactment undersection 3 , the BCI continues in being until its dissolution on the
establishment day and may act under and in accordance with andcarry out its functions under those enactments and accordingly thoseenactments continue to apply to the BCI until its dissolution.
(3) Notwithstanding any of the conditions of their appointment,
the term of a member of the BCI terminates on the establishmentday.
175.—(1) On the establishment day the BCC is dissolved.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act of 2001 under section
3, the BCC continues in being until its dissolution on the establish-
ment day and may act under and in accordance with and carry outits functions under that Act and accordingly that Act continues toapply to the BCC until its dissolution.
(3) Notwithstanding any of the conditions of their appointment,
the term of a member of the BCC shall terminate on the establish-ment day.
176.—(1) On the establishment day all land which, immediately
before that day, was vested in the BCI and all rights, powers andprivileges relating to or connected with such land shall, without anyconveyance or assignment, stand vested in the Authority for all theestate or interest for which immediately before the said day it wasvested in the BCI, but subject to all trusts and equities affecting theland subsisting and capable of being performed.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) On the establishment day all property other than land, includ-
ing choses-in-action, which immediately before that day was theproperty of the BCI shall stand vested in the Authority without anyassignment.
(3) Every chose-in-action transferred by subsection (2) to the
Authority may, after the establishment day, be sued on, recoveredor enforced by it in its own name and it shall not be necessary for itor the BCI to give notice to the person bound by the chose-in-actionof the transfer effected by that subsection.
(4) All rights and liabilities of the BCI arising by virtue of any
contract or commitment (express or implied) entered into by itbefore the establishment day shall on that day stand transferred tothe Authority.
(5) Every right and liability transferred by subsection (4) to the
Authority may, on and after the establishment day, be sued on, reco-vered or enforced by or against it in its own name and it shall not benecessary for it or the BCI to give notice to the person whose rightor liability is transferred by that subsection of such transfer.
(6) Any legal proceedings pending immediately before the estab-
lishment day to which the BCI is a party shall be continued with thesubstitution in the proceedings for the BCI of the Authority.
(7) Any licences granted by the Communications Regulator to the
BCI under an enactment repealed by section 3 which were extant on
the passing of this Act continue.
(8) Any contracts entered into by the BCI under an enactment
repealed by section 3 which were extant on the passing of this Act
continue.
(9) Anything commenced but not completed before the establish-
ment day by the BCI may be carried on and completed on or afterthat day by the Authority or a statutory committee.
(10) References to the BCI in any statute or in any instrument
made under any statute shall on the establishment day be read asreferences to the Authority.
177.—(1) All rights, liabilities and assets of the BCC immediately
before the establishment day stand transferred to the Authority.
(2) Any pending legal proceedings to which the BCC is a party
immediately before the establishment day shall continue in the nameof the Authority.
(3) Any investigations being carried out by the BCC immediately
before the establishment day shall continue in the name of the Com-pliance Committee.
(4) Anything commenced but not completed before the establish-
ment day by the BCC may be carried on and completed on or afterthat day by the Compliance Committee.
178.—(1) Final accounts of the BCI shall be drawn up by the
Authority as soon as may be after the establishment day in such formas may be approved of by the Minister, and in respect of such periodor periods as may be specified by the Minister.
167Pt.12 S.176
Transitional
provisions — BCC.
Final accounts of
BCI.Pt.12 S.178
Continuance of
Ministerial consentsgiven in respect ofpublic servicebroadcasters.
Collective citations
— WirelessTelegraphy Acts.
Amendment of
Broadcasting andWirelessTelegraphy Acts(increase of fines,etc.).
168[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(2) Accounts prepared under this section shall be submitted as
soon as may be by the Authority for audit, and, immediately afterthe audit, a copy of the income and expenditure account and of thebalance sheet and of such other (if any) of the accounts as the Mini-ster may direct and a copy of the auditor’s report on the accountsshall be presented to the Minister who shall cause copies of them tobe laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
179.—(1) Any consents granted by the Minister to Radio Telefı ´s
E´ireann or TG4 under an enactment repealed by section 3 which are
in force on the passing of this Act continue.
(2) Any licences granted by the Communications Regulator to
Radio Telefı ´sE´ireann or TG4 under an enactment repealed by
section 3 which are in force on the passing of this Act continue.
(3) A person appointed by the Government to be a member of
Radio Telefı ´sE´ireann or TG4 under an enactment repealed by
section 3 who is such a member on the passing of this Act continues
as such a member of the board of the corporation.
PART 13
Wireless Telegraphy
180.—(1) The Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1926 to 1988 and sections
181(1) to(7)and (9)and section 182 may be cited together as the
Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1926 to 2009.
(2) The Broadcasting (Offences) Acts 1968 and 1988, sections 9
to 16 of the Broadcasting Act 1990 and section 181(8) ,(10) and (11)
may be cited together as the Broadcasting (Offences) Acts 1968 to2009.
181.—(1) Section 2 of the Act of 1926 is amended—
(a) by substituting for the definition of “the appropriate auth-
ority” (inserted by Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the Act of2007) the following:
“except as provided by section 9, ‘appropriate authority’—
(a) in relation to wireless telegraphy apparatus in
ships and vessels associated with safety andsecurity on board them and their operation(including the certificates of competency forthe operation of apparatus for wireless telegra-phy on ships and vessels), means the Ministerfor Transport, and
(b) in relation to any other matter, means the
Commission;”,
(b) by deleting the definition of “broadcast matter”, and
(c) by inserting after the definition of “signalling station” the
following:[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“ ‘television set’ has the meaning assigned to it by section
140of the Broadcasting Act 2009 .”.
(2) Section 3 of the Act of 1926 is amended by substituting for
subsection (3) (inserted by section 12(1)( a) of the Act of 1988) the
following:
“(3) A person who keeps, has in his or her possession,
installs, maintains, works or uses any apparatus (other than atelevision set) in contravention of this section commits anoffence and is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding
\5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\250,000.”.
(3) Section 10 of the Act of 1926 is amended in subsection (8)
(inserted by section 12(1) (d)(ii) of the Act of 1988) by substituting
for paragraphs ( a) and ( b) the following:
“(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding
\5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\250,000.”.
(4) Section 11 of the Act of 1926 is amended in subsection (3)
(inserted by section 12(1)( f)of the Act of 1988) by substituting—
(a) in paragraph ( a)“\5,000” for “one thousand
pounds”, and
(b) in paragraph ( b)“\250,000” for “twenty thousand
pounds”.
(5) Section 12 of the Act of 1926 is amended in subsection (1) (as
amended by section 34( e) of the Broadcasting Authority Act 1960)
by substituting “under the Broadcasting Act 2009 ” for “under Part II
of this Act or under the Broadcasting Authority Act, 1960”.
(6) Section 12 of the Act of 1926 is amended in subsection (3) (as
amended by section 12(1) (g)of the Act of 1988) by substituting for
paragraphs ( a) and ( b) the following:
“(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding
\5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\250,000.”.
(7) Section 12A of the Act of 1926 is amended by substituting
for subsection (12) (inserted by section 12(1) (h)of the Act of 1988)
the following:
“(12) A person guilty of an offence under this section is
liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding
\5,000, or
169Pt.13 S.181Pt.13 S.181
170[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\250,000.”.
(8) Section 7(1) of the Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1968 is
amended by substituting—
(a) in paragraph (a)“\5,000” for “£1,000” (inserted by section
18 of the Act of 1988), and
(b) in paragraph (b)“\250,000” for “£20,000” (inserted by
that section).
(9) Section 10 of the Act of 1972 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by substituting for paragraph ( a) the
following:
“(a) without reasonable cause or excuse, fails to
comply with a requirement of an order undersection 5, or”,
(b) in subsection (3) (as amended by section 12(2) (a)of the
Act of 1988) by substituting—
(i) in paragraph (a),“\2,000” for “five hundred
pounds”, and
(ii) in paragraph (b),“\5,000” for “one thousand
pounds”, and
(c) in subsection (4) (a)(inserted by section 12(2) (b)of the
Act of 1988) by substituting for subparagraph (i) thefollowing:
“(i) A person guilty of an offence under subsec-
tion (2) is liable—
(I) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000, or
(II) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \250,000.”.
(10) The Act of 1988 is amended—
(a) in section 6, by substituting for subsection (1) the
following:
“(1) A person guilty of an offence under section 3, 4 or
5 is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding
\5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not
exceeding \250,000.”,
(b) in section 8, by substituting “ \5,000” for “£1,000”,
(c) in section 9, by substituting for subsection (4) the
following:[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
“(4) A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits
an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a finenot exceeding \5,000.”.
(11) Section 11 of the Broadcasting Act 1990 is amended by sub-
stituting for subsection (1) the following:
“(1) A person guilty of an offence under section 9 or 10 is
liable—
(a) on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
\5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\250,000.”.
182.—The Act of 1926 is amended by substituting for sections 5 to
9 the sections set out in Schedule 2 .
PART 14
Miscellaneous
183.—Section 2 of the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000 is
amended—
(a) by substituting for the definition of “broadcast” the
following:
“ ‘broadcast’ means a transmission by wireless means,
including by terrestrial or satellite means, whether digital
or analogue, for direct public reception or for presentationto members of the public of sounds, images or data or anycombination of sounds, images or data, or the represen-tations thereof, but does not include transmission bymeans of MMDS or digital terrestrial retransmission;”,
(b) in the definition of “cable programme service” by substi-
tuting “including MMDS and digital terrestrial retrans-mission” for “including MMDS”,
(c) by inserting after the definition of “database” the
following:
“ ‘digital terrestrial retransmission’ means the reception
and immediate retransmission on an encrypted basis with-out alteration by means of a multiplex of a broadcast or acable programme initially transmitted from anotherMember State of the EEA;”,
and
(d) by inserting after the definition of “MMDS” the following:
“ ‘multiplex’ has the meaning assigned to it in section 129
of the Broadcasting Act 2009 ;”.
171Pt.13 S.181
Matters relating to
wireless telegraphy.
Amendment to
definitions inCopyright andRelated Rights Act2000.Pt.14
Minister’s functions
in relation toelectroniccommunicationsnetworks andelectroniccommunicationsservices.
Amendment of
section 5 of Act of1998(advertisement, etc.,by ReferendumCommission).
172[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
184.—(1) Without prejudice to the Minister’s functions under this
or any other enactment, the Minister has the power and is deemedalways to have had the power, by himself or herself, or in conjunctionwith any other person, to fund, install, own and operate electroniccommunications networks and to provide electronic communicationsservices, including where such networks or services are for the pur-pose of providing broadcasting services.
(2) The Minister has all such incidental, supplemental, ancillary
and consequential powers as are necessary or expedient for the pur-pose of the exercise by him or her of the above powers.
(3) The exercise of the powers referred to in subsections (1) and
(2)is subject to all requirements otherwise imposed by law.
(4) The powers referred to in subsections (1) and (2)are in
addition to and not in substitution for any other powers or functionsof the Minister under this or any other enactment.
185.—The following section is substituted for section 5 of the Act
of 1998:
“5.—(1) Section 41(3) of the Broadcasting Act 2009 does not
apply to advertisements broadcast at the request of the Com-mission in relation to a matter referred to in section 3 concern-ing the referendum.
(2) The Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural
Resources, if so requested by the Commission following consul-tation by the Commission with RTE ´and TG4 and consideration
of any proposals of RTE ´or TG4 for broadcasts in connection
with the referendum that RTE ´or TG4 communicate to the
Commission, shall direct RTE ´and TG4 in writing to allocate
broadcasting time to facilitate the Commission in performing itsfunctions. RTE ´and TG4 shall comply with the direction.
(3) The Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural
Resources, if so requested by the Commission following consul-tation by the Commission with the BAI and consideration ofany proposals of the BAI for broadcasts in connection with thereferendum by sound broadcasting contractors, a televisionprogramme service contractor or content provision contractorsthat it communicates to the Commission, shall direct the BAI inwriting to arrange for the provision for and on behalf of theCommission of services (with or without charge) including theallocation of broadcasting time to facilitate the Commission inperforming its functions. The BAI shall comply with thedirection.
(4) In this section—
‘BAI’ means Broadcasting Authority of Ireland;‘RTE ´’ and ‘TG4’ have the meaning assigned to them, respec-
tively, by section 2 of the Broadcasting Act 2009 .”.[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
SCHEDULE 1
Enactments Repealed
Number and Short title Extent of repeal
year
No. 45 of 1926 Wireless Telegraphy Act 1926 Section 3A (inserted by
section 17 of No. 37 of 1976)and Part II.
No. 4 of 1956 Wireless Telegraph Act 1956 The whole Act
No. 10 of 1960 Broadcasting Authority Act The whole Act (other than
1960 Part II of the Third Schedule)
No. 4 of 1964 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1964
No. 7 of 1966 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1966
No. 2 of 1971 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1971
No. 5 of 1972 Wireless Telegraphy Act 1972 Sections 2, 3, 4, 9, 12 and 14
and the Schedule
No. 1 of 1973 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1973
No. 33 of 1974 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1974
No. 37 of 1976 Broadcasting Authority Sections 2 to 17 and 21
(Amendment) Act 1976
No. 36 of 1979 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1979
No. 24 of 1983 Postal and Sections 76 to 79
Telecommunications ServicesAct 1983
No. 19 of 1988 Broadcasting and Wireless Sections 2(2), 10, 11 and 17
Telegraphy Act 1988 to 20
No. 20 of 1988 Radio and Television Act The whole Act
1988
No. 24 of 1990 Broadcasting Act 1990 Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8
No. 15 of 1993 Broadcasting Authority The whole Act
(Amendment) Act 1993
No. 28 of 1999 Broadcasting (Major Events The whole Act
Television Coverage) Act1999
No. 4 of 2001 Broadcasting Act 2001 The whole Act
No. 13 of 2003 Broadcasting (Major Events The whole Act
Television Coverage)(Amendment) Act 2003
No. 43 of 2003 Broadcasting (Funding) Act The whole Act
2003
No. 14 of 2005 Disability Act 2005 Section 53
No. 15 of 2007 Broadcasting (Amendment) The whole Act
Act 2007
No. 22 of 2007 Communications Regulation Paragraph ( b) in the third col-
(Amendment) Act 2007 umn at item 4 in the first col-
umn of Part 1 of Schedule 1
173Section 3.Section 182.
174[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
SCHEDULE 2
Sections 5to9of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1926
Grant of
licences.5.—(1) The appropriate authority may, subject
to this Act and on payment of the prescribed fee(if any) grant to any person a licence to keep andhave possession of apparatus for wireless telegra-phy in any specified place in the State or to keepand have possession of apparatus for wireless tel-egraphy in any specified ship or other vessel oraircraft.
(2) Every licence granted under this section
shall be in such form, continue in force for suchperiod and be subject to such conditions andrestrictions (including conditions as to suspensionand revocation) as shall be prescribed in regard toit by regulations made by the appropriate auth-ority under section 6.
(3) Where it appears appropriate to the appro-
priate authority, it may, in the interests of theefficient and orderly use of wireless telegraphy,limit the number of licences for any particularclass or classes of apparatus for wireless telegra-phy granted under this section.
(4) This section does not apply to television
sets.
(5) For the purposes of this Act and any regu-
lations under section 6, a vehicle is itself deemedto be a place separate and distinct from the prem-ises in which the vehicle is ordinarily kept, andplace and specified place shall in this Act and inany such regulations be read accordingly.
Regulations in
regard tolicences.6.—(1) The appropriate authority may make
regulations prescribing in relation to all licencesgranted by it under section 5 or any particular classor classes of such licences all or any of the mattersfollowing that is to say—
(a) the form of such licences,
(b) the period during which such licences
continue in force,
(c) the manner in which, the terms on
which, and the period or periods forwhich such licences may be renewed,
(d) the circumstances in which or the terms
under which such licences are granted,
(e) the circumstances and manner in which
such licences may be suspended orrevoked by that authority,
(f) the terms and conditions to be observed
by the holders of such licences and[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
subject to which such licences are
deemed to be granted,
(g) the fees to be paid on the application,
grant or renewal of such licences orclasses of such licences, subject to suchexceptions as the appropriate authoritymay prescribe, and the time and man-ner at and in which such fees are tobe paid,
(h) matters which such licences do not
entitle or authorise the holder to do.
(2) Regulations made under this section may
authorise and provide for the granting of a licenceunder section 5 subject to special terms, con-ditions, and restrictions to any person who satisfiesthe appropriate authority that the person requiresthe licence solely for the purpose of conductingexperiments in wireless telegraphy.
(3) If it appears to be expedient to the appro-
priate authority to do so it may by instrument inwriting recognise as valid a licence issued byanother country or state in respect of a class orclasses of apparatus for wireless telegraphy subjectto such conditions or restrictions as to the use ofsuch apparatus as that authority sees fit.
(4) ( a) Every regulation made under this
section shall be laid before each Houseof the Oireachtas as soon as may beafter it is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may,
within 21 sitting days after the day onwhich a regulation was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph ( a), pass a
resolution annulling the regulation.
(c) The annulment under paragraph ( b)o f
a regulation takes effect immediatelyon the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anythingthat was done under it before the pass-ing of the resolution.
Obligation to
furnish certaininformation.7.—(1) The appropriate authority may, when-
ever it considers it appropriate to do so, serve ona person a special notice, accompanied by orincluding a form of declaration, requiring theperson—
(a) to state on the form of declaration such
one or more of the matters specified insubsection (2) as is specified in thenotice,
(b) to complete and sign the declaration,
and
175Sch. 2Sch. 2
176[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(c) to give or send the completed declar-
ation by post to a specified officer ofthat authority.
The special notice is required to be in writing
and to be sent by registered post.
(2) The matters which a person may be
required under this section to state in a declar-ation are—
(a) whether he or she does or does not keep
or has or has not in his or her pos-session any apparatus for wireless tel-egraphy (other than television sets),
(b) if he or she keeps or has in his or her
possession any such apparatus, the nat-ure of such apparatus, the name andaddress of the person by whom suchapparatus was sold, let, hired or other-wise supplied to him or her and theplace at which he or she keeps or hasthe same,
(c) whether he or she has or has not a
licence granted under section 5 andthen in force,
(d) if he or she has such a licence, the
number, date, and office of issue ofsuch licence,
(e) any matter which the Commission may
require for the purpose of an orderunder section 5 of the Wireless Tel-egraphy Act 1972, and
(f) any other matter relating to wireless tel-
egraphy (other than television sets).
(3) Every person on whom a special notice is
duly served under this section shall, within 14 daysafter service, duly and correctly complete inaccordance with the notice and this section theform of declaration to the officer named in thatbehalf in the notice. If the person fails or neglectsso to complete and give or send the declaration ormakes in the declaration any statement which is tohis or her knowledge false or misleading he or shecommits an offence and is liable on summary con-viction to a fine not exceeding \1,000.
(4) In a prosecution for an offence under sub-
section (3) in which it is shown that a specificnotice has been sent by registered post, it shall bepresumed, until the contrary is shown, that theperson to whom the notice was sent has not com-plied with the requirements of that subsection.
Issue of search
warrants.8.—(1) A judge of the District Court may, upon
the information on oath of an officer of the appro-priate authority or of a member of the Garda[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
Sı´ocha´na that there is reasonable ground for
believing that apparatus for wireless telegraphy isbeing kept or is being worked or used at any speci-fied place, specified vehicle or in any specified shipor other vessel in contravention of the Wireless
Telegraphy Acts 1926 to 2009 or any regulation
made or condition imposed under those Acts orthe Broadcasting (Offences) Acts 1968 to 2009 ,
issue to such officer or (with the consent of the
appropriate authority) to such member of theGarda Sı ´ocha´na (as the case may be) a search war-
rant which shall be expressed and shall operate toauthorise the officer of that authority or memberof the Garda Sı ´ocha´na to whom the same is
granted—
(a) to enter, within one month from the
date of issue of the warrant, on pro-duction of the warrant, if so requested,and if need be by force, the place,vehicle, ship or other vessel named inthe information,
(b) there to search for apparatus for wire-
less telegraphy and to examine all suchapparatus or any such vehicle foundthere, and
(c) to seize and take away all or any part of
such apparatus which appears to suchofficer or member to be kept, workedor used in contravention of the Wire-
less Telegraphy Acts 1926 to 2009 or
any regulation made or conditionimposed under those Acts or theBroadcasting (Offences) Acts 1968 to2009 .
(2) A search warrant granted under this section
shall operate to authorise any one or more of thefollowing, namely, any member of the GardaSı´ocha´na or officer of the appropriate authority or
other person authorised by the person to whomthe warrant is granted to accompany and assisthim or her in the exercise of the powers conferredon him or her by the warrant.
(3) An officer of the appropriate authority may
retain anything seized under this section which heor she believes to be evidence of any offence orsuspected offence under the Wireless Telegraphy
Acts 1926 to 2009 or the Broadcasting (Offences)
Acts 1968 to 2009 , for use as evidence in pro-
ceedings in relation to any such offence, for suchperiod from the date of seizure as is reasonable,or, if proceedings are commenced in which thething so seized is required for use in evidence,until the conclusion of the proceedings.
(4) The appropriate authority shall, as soon as
may be after the conclusion of any proceedings,deliver any thing seized and retained under this
177Sch. 2Sch. 2
178[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
section to the person who in its opinion is the
owner of it, unless—
(a) the appropriate authority decides it is
unable to ascertain who owns thething, in which case the Police(Property) Act 1897 applies to thething so seized and retained, or
(b) such delivery would result in a contra-
vention of the Wireless Telegraphy
Acts 1926 to 2009 or the Broadcasting
(Offences) Acts 1968 to 2009 , in which
case the Police (Property) Act 1897applies to the thing so seized andretained as though the appropriateauthority could not ascertain theowner of the thing.
(5) ( a) A person who by act or omission
impedes or obstructs an officer of theappropriate authority or a member ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na or any other per-
son in the exercise of a power con-ferred by a search warrant issuedunder this section commits an offence.
(b) A person who with intent to impede or
obstruct an officer of the appropriateauthority or a member of the GardaSı´ocha´na or any other person in the
exercise of a power conferred by asearch warrant issued under thissection places, erects, installs, keeps ormaintains any thing commits anoffence.
(c) A person guilty of an offence under this
subsection is liable on summary con-viction to a fine not exceeding \2,000.
Regulations as
to wirelesstelegraphy inships andaircraft.9.—(1) The appropriate authority may make
regulations in respect of all or any of the followingmatters, that is to say:
(a) requiring operators and other persons
engaged in the working of apparatusfor wireless telegraphy on—
(i) all or any ships registered under the
Mercantile Marine Act 1955, or
(ii) all or any classes or class of ships or
vessels navigating or operating inthe State,
to hold certificates of competency;
(b) requiring operators and other persons
engaged in the working of apparatusfor wireless telegraphy on all or anyclasses of aircraft owned or leased by[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
persons in the State to hold certificates
of competency;
(c) the grant and renewal of such certifi-
cates of competency, the terms andconditions on which such certificateswill be granted, and the qualificationsto be possessed and the examinationsand other tests to be undergone bypersons to whom such certificates aregranted;
(d) the duration, revocation and suspension
of certificates of competency grantedunder the regulations;
(e) the validity, duration, renewal, revo-
cation, and suspension of certificates ofcompetency granted otherwise thanunder the regulations whether by theappropriate authority or any otherperson;
(f) the fees to be charged for or in connec-
tion with the granting and renewal ofany such certificates of competence asaforesaid and the collection and dis-posal of such fees;
(g) regulating and controlling the times and
manner of working apparatus for wire-less telegraphy in ships registeredunder the Mercantile Marine Act 1955and, while they are in the State, shipsregistered outside the State andunregistered ships and other vessels;
(h) regulating and controlling the times and
manner of working apparatus for wire-less telegraphy in aircraft owned orleased by persons in the State and,while they are in or over the State orthe territorial waters thereof, aircraftnot so owned;
(i) giving effect to and securing compliance
with the provisions (save in so far asthe same relate to ships to which thissection and regulations made under itdo not apply) of any international con-vention in relation to wireless telegra-phy entered into by the Government.
(2) Regulations made under this section may—
(a) provide that a breach or contravention
of any specified such regulation shallbe an offence, and
(b) in relation to convictions on indictment
for such an offence, provide that thecourt by whom the defendant is con-victed may order the interest of the
179Sch. 2Sch. 2
180[No. 18.] [2009.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
defendant, whether as owner or other-
wise, in all or any apparatus in respectof or by means of which the court issatisfied a breach or contravention ofa specified such regulation was com-mitted to be forfeited.
(3) ( a) Every regulation made under this
section shall be laid before each Houseof the Oireachtas as soon as may beafter it is made.
(b) Either House of the Oireachtas may,
within 21 sitting days after the day onwhich a regulation was laid before it inaccordance with paragraph ( a), pass a
resolution annulling the regulation.
(c) The annulment under paragraph ( b)o f
a regulation takes effect immediatelyon the passing of the resolution con-cerned, but does not affect anythingthat was done under it before the pass-ing of the resolution.
(4) A person guilty of an offence by reason of
a breach or contravention of a regulation speci-fied, by virtue of paragraph ( a) of subsection (2),
in regulations made under this section is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \250,000.
(5) For the purposes of this section—
(a) a ship is deemed to be navigating or
operating in the State if it is usuallykept in Irish waters (within the mean-ing of section 2 of the Maritime SafetyAct 2005), and
(b) an aircraft is deemed to be owned or
leased by a person in the State if butonly if it is owned or leased by a per-
son who—
(i) in the case of an individual, has his
or her place of residence in theState, or
(ii) in the case of an association, com-
pany (within the meaning of theCompanies Acts) or otherbody (whether corporate orunincorporate) has its principaloffice in the State.
(6) In this section, ‘appropriate authority’—[2009.] [ No. 18.] Broadcasting Act 2009 .
(a) in relation to apparatus for wireless tel-
egraphy on ships or other vessels,means the Minister for Transport, and
(b) in relation to apparatus for wireless tel-
egraphy on aircraft, means theCommission.
181Sch. 2