————————
Number 45of2009
————————
COMPANIES (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Transitional accounting standards.
2. Regulations.3. Amendment of Companies Act 1990.4. Amendment of Companies (Auditing and Accounting) Act
2003.
5. Amendment of UCITS Regulations.6. Short title, commencement and construction.
————————
12[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
Acts Referred to
Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33
Companies ActsCompanies (Auditing and Accounting) Act 2003 2003, No. 44Investment Funds, Companies and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions Act 2005 2005, No. 12————————
Number 45of2009
————————
COMPANIES (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE, IN LIMITED CIRCUMSTANCES, FOR
THE TRANSITIONAL USE BY CERTAIN PARENTUNDERTAKINGS OF INTERNATIONALLY RECOG-NISED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS OTHER THANTHOSE GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRIN-CIPLES AND POLICIES USED IN THE STATE, TOAMEND THE COMPANIES ACT 1990, THE COMPANIES(AUDITING AND ACCOUNTING) ACT 2003 AND THEEUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (UNDERTAKINGS FORCOLLECTIVE INVESTMENT IN TRANSFERABLESECURITIES) REGULATIONS 2003, AND TO PROVIDEFOR RELATED MATTERS.
[23rd December , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—(1) In this section —
“accounts ”means Companies Act individual accounts and Compan-
ies Act group accounts;
“relevant parent undertaking ”means a parent undertaking —
(a) which does not have securities admitted to trading on a
regulated market,
(b) whose securities (or whose receipts in respect of those
securities) are registered with the Securities andExchange Commission of the United States of America,or which is otherwise subject to reporting to that Com-mission, under the laws of the United States ofAmerica, and
(c) which, prior to the commencement of this section, has not
made and was not required to make an annual return tothe registrar of companies to which accounts wererequired to have been annexed;
“US generally accepted accounting principles ”means the standards
and interpretations, in relation to accounting and financial state-ments, issued by any of the following bodies constituted under thelaws of the United States of America or of a territorial unit of theUnited States of America:
(a) the Financial Accounting Standards Board;
3Transitional
accountingstandards.S.1
Regulations.
4[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants;
(c) the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(2) This section applies to the accounts of a relevant parent
undertaking that are prepared for such of its first 4 financial yearsafter it is incorporated in the State as end or ends not later than 31December 2015.
(3) To the extent that the use of US generally accepted account-
ing principles does not contravene any provision of the CompaniesActs or of any regulations made thereunder —
(a) a true and fair view of the state of affairs and profit or loss
of a relevant parent undertaking may be given by the useby that undertaking of those principles in the preparationof its Companies Act individual accounts, and
(b) a true and fair view of the state of affairs and profit or
loss of a relevant parent undertaking and its subsidiaryundertakings as a whole may be given by the use by thatrelevant parent undertaking of those principles in thepreparation of its Companies Act group accounts.
(4) Where accounts are prepared in accordance with this section,
the notes to those accounts shall contain a statement to that effect.
2.—(1) In this section “accounts ”means Companies Act
individual accounts and Companies Act group accounts.
(2) The Minister may make regulations providing for specified
categories of parent undertakings which do not have securities admit-ted to trading on a regulated market and providing that —
(a) a true and fair view of the state of affairs and profit or loss
of a parent undertaking in such a category may be givenby the preparation by it of its Companies Act individualaccounts for a specified number, not to exceed 4, of itsfirst financial years in accordance with specified account-ing standards, and
(b) a true and fair view of the state of affairs and profit or
loss of a parent undertaking in such a category and itssubsidiary undertakings as a whole may be given by thepreparation by that parent undertaking of its CompaniesAct group accounts for a specified number, not to exceed4, of its first financial years in accordance with specifiedaccounting standards.
(3) Regulations made under subsection (2) shall —
(a) specify the accounting standards, which shall be —
(i) internationally recognised, and
(ii) generally accepted accounting principles or practice
of a jurisdiction —
(I) to which a majority of the subsidiaries of the
parent undertaking have a substantial connec-tion, or[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(II) in which the market on which the shares of the
parent undertaking are primarily admitted totrading is situated,
(b) specify the number of financial years in respect of which
the regulations apply, and the date on which the latest ofsuch financial years shall end, which shall be not laterthan 31 December 2015, and
(c) provide that the preparation of such accounts shall not
contravene any provision of the Companies Acts or ofany regulations made thereunder.
(4) Every regulation under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the regulation is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after the regu-lation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulled accordinglybut without prejudice to the validity of anything previously donethereunder.
(5) Where accounts are prepared in accordance with regulations
made under this section, the notes to those accounts shall contain astatement to that effect.
3.—The Companies Act 1990 is amended —
(a) in section 3(2), by substituting the following for para-
graph ( a):
“(a) A recognised stock exchange for the purposes
of any provision of the Companies Acts is anexchange or a market, whether within or out-side the State, prescribed by the Minister forthe purposes of that provision. ”,
(b) in section 7(3), by deleting “, to an amount not less than
£5,000 and not exceeding £250,000, ”,
(c) in section 13(1), by substituting “relevant Minister. ”for
“relevant Minister, provided that no such liability on the
part of the applicant or applicants shall exceed in theaggregate £250,000. ”,
(d) in section 212 —
(i) in subsection (1)( b), by inserting “within the State ”
after “exchange ”,
(ii) by inserting the following subsection after subsection
(1):
“(1A) For the purposes of sections 215, 226, 226A
and 229, a purchase by a company that issues shares,or by a subsidiary of that company, of the first-men-tioned company ’s shares, is an ‘overseas market pur-
chase ’if the shares are purchased on a recognised
stock exchange outside the State and are subject to amarketing arrangement. ”,
and
5S.2
Amendment of
Companies Act1990.S.3
6[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(iii) in subsection (2), by deleting “subsection (1) ”and
substituting “subsections (1) and (1A) ”,
(e) in section 215(1), by inserting “or overseas market pur-
chase ”after “market purchase ”in each place where it
occurs,
(f) in section 226(1), by inserting “or, in the case of an over-
seas market purchase, within 3 working days, ”after “28
days ”,
(g) by inserting the following section after section 226:
“Duty of
company topublishparticulars ofoverseasmarketpurchase.226A. —(1) Whenever shares for which
dealing facilities are provided on a recog-nised stock exchange are the subject of anoverseas market purchase either by thecompany which issued the shares or by acompany which is that company ’s subsidi-
ary, the company which issued the sharesshall publish, on its website for a continu-ous period of not less than 28 days begin-ning on the day that next follows the over-seas market purchase concerned and is aday on which the recognised stockexchange concerned is open for business, orin any other prescribed manner, the follow-ing information for total purchases on therecognised stock market concerned on eachsuch day:
(a) the date, in the place outside the
State where the recognisedstock market concerned islocated, of the overseas marketpurchase;
(b) the purchase price at which the
shares were purchased, or thehighest such price and lowestsuch price paid by that companyor subsidiary;
(c) the number of shares which
were purchased;
(d) the recognised stock exchange on
which the shares werepurchased.
(2) If default is made in complying with
this section, the company and every officerof the company who is in default shall beguilty of an offence. ”,
(h) in section 229(1), by inserting “, other than when the pur-
chase was an overseas market purchase, ”after
“subsidiary ”,
(i) in section 256(8), by inserting “, other than a company to
which section 256F applies, ”after “this Part applies ”, and[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(j) by inserting the following after section 256E:
“Continuation
of foreigninvestmentcompanies.256F. —(1) In this section —
‘migrating company ’means a body corpor-
ate which is established and registeredunder the laws of a relevant jurisdiction andwhich is a collective investmentundertaking;
‘registration documents ’, in relation to a
migrating company, means the followingdocuments and, when the original regis-tration documents are not written in theIrish language or the English language,means a translation into the Irish languageor the English language certified as being acorrect translation thereof by a person whois competent to so certify:
(a) a copy, certified and authenti-
cated in the prescribed manner,of the certificate of registrationor equivalent certificate ordocument issued with respect tothe migrating company underthe laws of the relevantjurisdiction;
(b) a copy, certified and authenti-
cated in the prescribed manner,of the memorandum andarticles of association of themigrating company or equiv-alent constitutive document ofthe migrating company;
(c) a list setting out particulars in
relation to the directors and sec-retary of the migrating companyin accordance with the pro-visions of section 195 of thePrincipal Act;
(d) a statutory declaration of a direc-
tor of the migrating companymade not more than 28 daysprior to the date on which theapplication is made to the regis-trar to the effect that —
(i) the migrating company is, as
of the date of the declar-ation, established andregistered in the relevantjurisdiction, no petition orother similar proceeding towind up or liquidate themigrating company hasbeen notified to it andremains outstanding in anyplace, and no order has
7S.3S.3
8[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
been notified to the migrat-
ing company or resolutionadopted to wind up orliquidate the migratingcompany in any place,
(ii) the appointment of a
receiver, liquidator, exam-iner or other similar personhas not been notified to themigrating company and, atthe date of the declaration,no such person is acting inthat capacity in any placewith respect to the migrat-ing company or its propertyor any part thereof,
(iii) the migrating company is
not, at the date of the dec-laration, operating orcarrying on business underany scheme, order,compromise or othersimilar arrangemententered into or made bythe migrating companywith creditors in any place,
(iv) at the date of the declaration
the migrating company hasserved notice of the pro-posed registration on thecreditors of the migratingcompany,
(v) any consent or approval to
the proposed registration inthe State required by anycontract entered into orundertaking given by themigrating company hasbeen obtained or waived,as the case may be, and
(vi) the registration is permitted
by and has been approvedin accordance with thememorandum and articlesof association or equivalentconstitutive document ofthe migrating company;
(e) a declaration of solvency pre-
pared in accordance withsection 256H;
(f) a schedule of the charges or
security interests created orgranted by the migrating com-pany that would, if such chargesor security interests had been[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
created or granted by a com-
pany incorporated under theCompanies Acts, have beenregistrable under Part IV of thePrincipal Act and such part-iculars of those securityinterests and charges as arespecified in section 103 of thePrincipal Act;
(g) notification of the proposed
name of the migrating companyif different from its existingname; and
(h) a copy of the memorandum and
articles of association of themigrating company which themigrating company has resolvedto adopt, which shall be in theIrish language or the Englishlanguage, which shall take effecton registration under thissection and which the migratingcompany undertakes not toamend before registration with-out the prior authorisation ofthe registrar;
‘relevant jurisdiction ’means the prescribed
place outside the State where the migratingcompany is established and registered atthe time of its application under thissection.
(2) A migrating company may apply to
the registrar to be registered as a companyin the State by way of continuation.
(3) Where an application is made under
subsection (2), the registrar shall not regis-ter the migrating company as a company inthe State unless he or she is satisfied thatall of the requirements of the CompaniesActs in respect of the registration and ofmatters precedent and incidental theretohave been complied with and, in particular,but without prejudice to the generality ofthe foregoing, he or she is satisfied that —
(a) the migrating company has deliv-
ered to the registrar an appli-cation for the purpose, in theprescribed form and signed by adirector of the migrating com-pany, together with the regis-tration documents,
(b) the name or, if relevant, the pro-
posed new name of the migrat-ing company has not beendetermined to be undesirable
9S.3S.3
10[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
pursuant to section 21 of the
Principal Act,
(c) the migrating company has paid
to the registrar such fee as maybe specified from time to timepursuant to section 369 of thePrincipal Act,
(d) the migrating company has filed
with the registrar notice of theaddress of its proposed regis-tered office in the State,
(e) the migrating company has
applied to the Central Bank tobe authorised to carry on busi-ness as a company under section256(1) and the Central Bankhas notified the migrating com-pany and the registrar that itproposes to authorise themigrating company to so carryon business.
(4) An application under this section
shall be accompanied by a statutory declar-ation in the prescribed form made by a sol-icitor engaged for this purpose by the
migrating company, or by a director of themigrating company, and stating that therequirements mentioned in subsection (3)have been complied with. The registrar mayaccept such a declaration as sufficient evi-dence of compliance.
(5) The registrar shall, as soon as is prac-
ticable after receipt of the application forregistration, publish notice of it in the Com-panies Registration Office Gazette.
(6) Where the registrar receives a notifi-
cation under subsection (3)( e), the
registrar —
(a) may issue a certificate of regis-
tration of the migrating com-pany by way of continuation ofthe migrating company as abody corporate under the lawsof the State, and
(b) if he or she issues such a certifi-
cate, shall enter in the registermaintained for the purpose ofsection 103 of the Principal Act,in relation to charges and secur-ity interests of the migratingcompany specified in paragraph[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(f) of the definition of ‘regis-
tration documents ’in subsec-
tion (1), the particulars pre-scribed by section 103 of thePrincipal Act which have beensupplied by the migratingcompany.
(7) The migrating company shall, as
soon as may be after being registered undersubsection (6), apply to be de-registered inthe relevant jurisdiction.
(8) The registrar shall enter in the regis-
ter of companies the date of registration ofthe migrating company and shall forthwithpublish notice in the Companies Regis-tration Office Gazette of the followingmatters:
(a) the date of the registration of the
migrating company under thissection;
(b) the relevant jurisdiction; and
(c) the previous name of the migrat-
ing company if different fromthe name under which it isbeing registered.
(9) From the date of registration, the
migrating company shall be deemed to be acompany formed and registered under thisAct and shall continue for all purposesunder this Act, and the provisions of thisPart shall apply to the migrating company,provided always that this section shall notoperate —
(a) to create a new legal entity,
(b) to prejudice or affect the identity
or continuity of the migratingcompany as previously estab-lished and registered under thelaws of the relevant jurisdictionfor the period that the migratingcompany was established andregistered in the relevantjurisdiction,
(c) to affect any contract made, res-
olution passed or any other actor thing done in relation to themigrating company during theperiod that the migrating com-pany was so established andregistered,
(d) to affect the rights, powers, auth-
orities, functions and liabilities
11S.3S.3
12[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
or obligations of the migrating
company or any other person,or
(e) to render defective any legal pro-
ceedings by or against themigrating company.
(10) Without prejudice to the generality
of subsection (9) —
(a) the failure of a migrating com-
pany to send to the registrar theparticulars of a charge or secur-ity interest created prior to thedate of registration shall notprejudice any rights which anyperson in whose favour thecharge was made or securityinterest created may havethereunder, and
(b) any legal proceedings that could
have been continued or com-menced by or against themigrating company before itsregistration under this sectionmay, notwithstanding the regis-tration, be continued or com-menced by or against themigrating company afterregistration.
(11) The migrating company shall notify
the registrar in the prescribed form, andnotify the Central Bank, within 3 days of itsde-registration in the relevant jurisdiction,of that de-registration.
(12) On registration of the migrating
company under subsection (6), the CentralBank shall forthwith authorise the migrat-ing company to carry on business underthis Part.
(13) If there is any material change in
any of the information contained in thestatutory declaration mentioned in para-graph ( d) of the definition of ‘registration
documents ’in subsection (1) after the date
of the declaration and before the date ofthe registration under this section, thedirector who made that statutory declar-ation, and any other director who becomesaware of that material change shall forth-with deliver a new statutory declaration tothe registrar relating to the change.
(14) If the migrating company fails to
comply with any provision of this section,the registrar may send to the company bypost a registered letter stating that, unless[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
the migrating company rectifies the failure
within 1 month of the date of the letter andconfirms that it has rectified the failure, anotice may be published in the CompaniesRegistration Office Gazette with a view tostriking the name of the migrating companyoff the register.
(15) If the failure mentioned in subsec-
tion (14) is not rectified within 1 monthafter the sending of the letter referred to inthat subsection, the registrar may publish inthe Companies Registration Office Gazettea notice stating that, at the expiration of 1month from the date of that notice, thename of the migrating company mentionedtherein will, unless the matter is resolved,be struck off the register, and the migratingcompany will be dissolved.
(16) At the expiration of the time men-
tioned in the notice, the registrar may,unless cause to the contrary is previouslyshown by the migrating company, strike itsname off the register, and shall publishnotice thereof in the Companies Regis-tration Office Gazette, and on that publi-cation, the migrating company shall bedissolved.
(17) The Minister may make regulations
prescribing places as relevant jurisdictionsfor the purposes of this section, where heor she is satisfied that the law of the placeconcerned makes provision for migratingcompanies to continue under the laws ofthe State or for companies to continueunder the laws of that place in a substan-tially similar manner to continuations underthis section.
(18) Every regulation made by the Mini-
ster under subsection (17) shall be laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas assoon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the regulation ispassed by either House within the next 21days on which that House has sat after theregulation is laid before it, the regulationshall be annulled accordingly, but withoutprejudice to the validity of anything pre-viously done thereunder.
De-registration
of companieswhencontinuedunder the lawof placeoutside theState.256G. —(1) In this section —
‘applicant ’means a company that applies to
be de-registered under this section;
‘relevant jurisdiction ’means the prescribed
place outside the State in which the com-pany proposes to be registered;
13S.3S.3
14[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
‘transfer documents ’, in relation to an
applicant, means the following documents:
(a) a statutory declaration of a direc-
tor of the applicant made notmore than 28 days prior to thedate on which the application ismade to the registrar to theeffect that —
(i) the applicant will, upon
registration, continue as abody corporate under thelaws of the relevantjurisdiction,
(ii) no petition or other similar
proceeding to wind up orliquidate the applicant hasbeen notified to the appli-cant and remains outstand-ing in any place, and noorder has been notified tothe applicant or resolutionadopted to wind up orliquidate the applicant inany place,
(iii) the appointment of a
receiver, liquidator, exam-iner or other similar personhas not been notified to theapplicant and, at the dateof the declaration, no suchperson is acting in thatcapacity in any place withrespect to the applicant orits property or any partthereof,
(iv) the applicant is not, at the
date of the declaration,operating or carrying onbusiness under any scheme,order, compromise or othersimilar arrangemententered into or made bythe applicant with creditorsin any place,
(v) the application for de-regis-
tration is not intended todefraud persons who are, atthe date of the declaration,creditors of the applicant,
(vi) any consent or approval to
the proposed de-regis-tration required by anycontract entered into orundertaking given by theapplicant has been[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
obtained or waived, as the
case may be, and
(vii) the de-registration is permit-
ted by the memorandumand articles of associationof the applicant;
(b) a declaration of solvency pre-
pared in accordance with theprovisions of section 256H; and
(c) a copy of a special resolution of
the applicant that approves theproposed de-registration andthe transfer of the applicant tothe relevant jurisdiction.
(2) An applicant which proposes to be
registered in a relevant jurisdiction by wayof continuation as a body corporate mayapply to the registrar to be de-registered inthe State.
(3) Where an application is made under
subsection (2), the registrar shall not de-register the applicant as a company in theState unless he or she is satisfied that all ofthe requirements of the Companies Acts inrespect of the de-registration and of mattersprecedent and incidental thereto have beencomplied with and, in particular, but with-out prejudice to the generality of the fore-going, he or she is satisfied that —
(a) the applicant has delivered to the
registrar an application for thepurpose, in the prescribed formand signed by a director of theapplicant, together with thetransfer documents,
(b) the applicant has paid to the
registrar such fee as may bespecified from time to time pur-suant to section 369 of the Prin-cipal Act,
(c) the applicant has informed the
Central Bank of its intention tobe de-registered and the Cen-tral Bank has notified the regis-trar that it has no objection tothe de-registration, so long asthe applicant complies with anyconditions that the CentralBank may impose on the appli-cant, and
(d) the applicant has filed with the
registrar notice of any proposedchange in its name and of its
15S.3S.3
16[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
proposed registered office or
agent for service of process inthe relevant jurisdiction.
(4) An application under this section
shall be accompanied by a statutory declar-ation in the prescribed form made by a sol-icitor engaged for this purpose by the appli-cant, or by a director of the applicant, andstating that the requirements mentioned insubsection (3) have been complied with.The registrar may accept such a declarationas sufficient evidence of compliance.
(5) The registrar shall, as soon as is prac-
ticable after receipt of the application forde-registration, publish notice of it in theCompanies Registration Office Gazette.
(6) ( a) Where an application is made
under subsection (2), a personmentioned in paragraph ( b)
may apply to the High Court,on notice to the applicant, theCentral Bank, the registrar andall creditors of the applicant,not later than 60 days after thepublication of the notice undersubsection (5), for an orderpreventing the proposal or pass-age of a resolution specified inparagraph ( c) of the definition
of‘transfer documents ’in sub-
section (1) from taking effect inrelation to the application.
(b) The following persons may apply
for an order under thissubsection:
(i) the holders of not less than 5
per cent of the issued sharecapital of the applicant andwho have not voted in fav-our of the resolution, or
(ii) any creditor of the applicant.
(c) Notice of an application for an
order under this subsection may
be given to the creditors con-cerned by publication in at leastone national newspaper in theState.
(d) The Central Bank and the appli-
cant concerned shall be entitledto make representations to theHigh Court before an orderunder this subsection is made.[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(7) The High Court may make an order
mentioned in subsection (6) only if it issatisfied that —
(a) the proposed de-registration of
the applicant would contravenethe terms of an agreement orarrangement between the appli-cant and any shareholder orcreditor of the applicant; or
(b) the proposed de-registration
would be materially prejudicialto any shareholder or creditorof the applicant and theinterests of shareholders andcreditors or both taken as awhole would be materiallyprejudiced.
(8) An order made under subsection (7)
shall specify the period in respect of whichit shall remain in force.
(9) An order of the High Court under
subsection (7) is final and conclusive.
(10) Unless the High Court orders
otherwise, when one or more than oneapplication is made under subsection (6), aresolution specified in paragraph ( c)o ft h e
definition of ‘transfer documents ’in subsec-
tion (1) in relation to a company shall nottake effect until —
(a) where the application or all the
applications to the High Courtare withdrawn —
(i) the day on which the resol-
ution is passed,
(ii) the day next following the
day on which the last out-standing application iswithdrawn, or
(iii) the 31st day following the
publication of the notice onthe creditors under subsec-tion (4),
whichever is the latest, and
(b) where all applications to the
High Court are notwithdrawn —
(i) the day on which the resol-
ution is passed,
17S.3S.3
18[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(ii) the day specified in the
order or, if no date is speci-fied in the order, the daynext following the day onwhich the period for whichthe order is specified toremain in force expires orotherwise ceases to be inforce, or
(iii) the day next following the
decision of the High Court,
whichever is the latest.
(11) When the applicant is registered as
a company under the laws of the relevantjurisdiction, it shall give notice to the regis-trar of that fact within 3 working days ofbecoming so registered, including its newname, if any, and, as soon as practicableafter receiving that notice, the registrarshall issue a certificate of de-registration ofthe applicant.
(12) The registrar shall enter in the
register of companies the date of the de-registration of the applicant and shall,within 7 days of the issuance of the certifi-cate under subsection (11), publish in theCompanies Registration Office Gazettenotice of the following matters:
(a) the date of the de-registration of
the applicant under this section;
(b) the relevant jurisdiction; and
(c) the new name of the applicant if
different from the name underwhich it was registered.
(13) From the date of registration of the
applicant in the relevant jurisdiction, it shallcease to be a company for all purposes ofthe Companies Acts and shall continue forall purposes as a body corporate under thelaws of the relevant jurisdiction, providedalways that this section shall not operate —
(a) to create a new legal entity,
(b) to prejudice or affect the identity
or continuity of the applicant aspreviously constituted under thelaws of the State for the periodthat the applicant was so con-stituted,
(c) to affect any contract made, res-
olution passed or any other actor thing done in relation to the[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
applicant during the period that
the applicant was constitutedunder the laws of the State,
(d) to affect the rights, powers, auth-
orities, functions and liabilitiesor obligations of the applicantor any other person, or
(e) to render defective any legal pro-
ceedings by or against theapplicant.
(14) Without prejudice to the generality
of subsection (13), any legal proceedingsthat could have been continued or com-menced by or against the applicant beforeits de-registration under this section may,notwithstanding the de-registration, be con-tinued or commenced by or against theapplicant after registration.
(15) The Minister may make regulations
prescribing places as relevant jurisdictionsfor the purposes of this section, where heor she is satisfied that the law of the placeconcerned makes provision for bodies cor-porate that are substantially similar toapplicants under this section to continueunder the laws of the State in a substan-tially similar manner to continuations undersection 256F or for companies to continueunder the laws of that place.
(16) Every regulation made by the Mini-
ster under subsection (15) shall be laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas assoon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the regulation ispassed by either House within the next 21days on which that House has sat after theregulation is laid before it, the regulationshall be annulled accordingly, but withoutprejudice to the validity of anything pre-viously done thereunder.
Statutory
declarations.256H. —(1) Where an application is
made under section 256F or 256G, a direc-tor of the migrating company or applicant,as the case may be, making the applicationshall make a statutory declaration statingthat he or she has made a full inquiry intoits affairs and has formed the opinion thatit is able to pay its debts as they fall due.
(2) A declaration under subsection (1)
shall have no effect for the purposes of thissection unless —
(a) it is made not more than 28 days
prior to the date on which the
19S.3S.3
20[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
application is made to the
registrar,
(b) it contains a statement of the
migrating company ’s or appli-
cant’s assets and liabilities as at
the latest practicable datebefore the making of the declar-ation, and, in any case as at adate that is not more than 3months before the making ofthe declaration, and
(c) a report made by an independent
person under subsection (3) isattached to the declaration,along with a statement by theindependent person that he orshe has given and has not with-drawn consent to the making ofthe declaration with the reportattached to it.
(3) The report mentioned in subsection
(2)(c) shall state whether, in the indepen-
dent person ’s opinion, based on the infor-
mation and explanations given to him orher, the opinion of the director mentionedin subsection (1) and the statement of themigrating company ’s or applicant ’s assets
and liabilities referred to in subsection(2)(b), are reasonable.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3),
the independent person shall be a personwho, at the time the report is made, isqualified to be the auditor of the companyor applicant, or of bodies corporate —
(a) in the case of an application
under section 256F, under thelaws of the relevant juris-diction, and
(b) in the case of an application
under section 256G, under thelaws of the State.
(5) A director who makes a declaration
under this section without having reason-
able grounds for the opinion that themigrating company or applicant is able topay its debts as they fall due commits anoffence and is liable —
(a) on summary conviction to a fine
not exceeding €5,000, or impris-
onment for a term notexceeding 12 months, or toboth, or[2009.] [ No. 45.] Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
(b) on conviction on indictment to a
fine not exceeding €50,000, or
imprisonment for a term notexceeding 5 years, or to both.
(6) Where the migrating company or
applicant is wound up within 1 year of thedate on which the application is made tothe registrar and its debts are not paid orprovided for in full within that year, it shallbe presumed, unless the contrary is shown,that the director did not have reasonablegrounds for his or her opinion. ”.
4.—(1) Section 27 of the Companies (Auditing and Accounting)
Act 2003 is amended —
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (1):
“(1) The Supervisory Authority may delegate some or
all of its functions and powers under sections 23 to 26 toa committee established for that purpose and consistingof persons from one or more of the following categoriesof persons:
(a) persons who are, at the time the committee is
established, directors of the Authority,
(b) other persons that the Authority considers
appropriate. ”,
and
(b) by inserting in subsection (4) “, including the determi-
nation of whether a matter should be referred to a com-mittee established for a purpose referred to in subsection(1)”after “behalf ”.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, a committee that was established
under subsection (1) of section 27 of the Companies (Auditing andAccounting) Act 2003 prior to the commencement of section 4 of the
Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 shall be deemed to
have been properly constituted, and shall be deemed to have and tohave had all the powers necessary to perform its functions notwith-standing that any of its members was a director when he or she wasappointed to the committee but ceased to be such a director beforethe completion of the enquiry, investigation or review for which itwas established.
5.—(1) The UCITS Regulations are amended by inserting the fol-
lowing after Regulation 36F (inserted by section 77 of and the Sched-ule to the Investment Funds, Companies and Miscellaneous Pro-visions Act 2005):
“Application
of jurisdictiontransferprovisions toinvestmentcompaniesestablished asUCITS.36G. —The provisions of sections 256F to 256H
of the Companies Act 1990 (inserted by section 3
of the Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2009 ) shall apply to any investment company auth-
orised pursuant to these Regulations and for this
21S.3
Amendment of
Companies(Auditing andAccounting) Act2003.
Amendment of
UCITS Regulations.S.5
Short title,
commencement andconstruction.
22[No. 45.] [2009.]Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act2009 .
purpose the references to authorisation shall be
read as referring to authorisation pursuant tothese Regulations. ”.
(2) In this section “UCITS Regulations ”means the European
Communities (Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transfer-able Securities) Regulations 2003 (S.I. No. 211 of 2003) as amended.
6.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Companies (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2009.
(2) This Act (other than sections 1 and 2,paragraphs (a) to(h)of
section 3 , and section 4 ) shall come into operation on such day or
days as may be appointed by order or orders of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment, either generally or with refer-ence to a particular purpose or provision, and different days may beso appointed for different purposes and different provisions.
(3) The Companies Acts and this Act are to be read together
as one.