————————
Number 1of2009
————————
ANGLO IRISH BANK CORPORATION ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definitions.
2. Functions performed in the public interest.3. Relationship framework between the Minister and Anglo
Irish Bank.
4. Effect of this Act.5. Acquisition of shares in Anglo Irish Bank.6. Effect of acquisition of shares.7. General exercise of Minister’s rights as shareholder.8. Minister’s power to transfer shares to nominee.
9. Effect on certain other rights.
10. Extinguishment of certain rights in relation to shares.11. Equitable interests in shares.12. De-listing.13. Disapplication, etc., of certain provisions of Central Bank
Acts.
14. Disapplication, etc., of certain laws relating to companies.15. Disapplication of certain provisions of Competition Act 2002
and Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008.
16. Disapplication of certain requirements in relation to notice
of acquisition of shares.
17. Suspension, etc., of articles of Anglo Irish Bank.18. Minister may alter financial year of Anglo Irish Bank.
12[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
19. Removal of directors, etc., of Anglo Irish Bank.
20. Appointment of directors, etc., of Anglo Irish Bank.21. No shadow or de facto directorship.
22. Appointment of Assessor.23. Expenses, etc., of Assessor and engagement of staff.24. Submissions to Assessor.25. Determination of fair and reasonable aggregate value.26. Circulation of draft report for comment.27. Report by Assessor.28. Compensation Scheme.29. Claims for compensation.30. Amount payable as compensation.31. Review of determination of compensation, etc.32. Limitation of judicial review of the Assessor’s determination.33. Expenses, etc., of Minister.34. Minister may issue securities, etc.35. Offences under this Act.36. Regulations — facilitation of performance of functions.37. Regulations — general implementation of this Act.38. Amendment of other Acts.39. Short title.
SCHEDULE
Powers to Require Persons to Give Evidence or Produce
Documents
————————[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
Acts Referred to
Asset Covered Securities Acts 2001 and 2007
Central Bank Act 1942 1942, No. 22Central Bank Act 1971 1971, No. 24Central Bank Act 1989 1989, No. 16Central Bank Act 1997 1997, No. 8Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Act 2003 2003, No. 12
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Act 2004 2004, No. 21
Companies Act 1963 1963, No. 33Companies (Amendment) Act 1983 1983, No. 13Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33Companies ActsCompetition Act 2002 2002, No. 14Consumer Protection Act 2007 2007, No. 19Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008 2008, No. 18European Communities Act 1972 1972, No. 27Finance Act 1970 1970, No. 14Investment Funds, Companies and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions Act 2006 2006, No. 41
Irish Takeover Panel Act 1997 1997, No. 5Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37National Treasury Management Agency Act 1990 1990, No. 18Statutory Instruments Act 1947 1947, No. 44Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2007
34————————
Number 1of2009
————————
ANGLO IRISH BANK CORPORATION ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE, IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST, FOR
MAINTAINING THE STABILITY OF THE FINANCIALSYSTEM IN THE STATE, AND FOR THAT PURPOSE—
(A) TO PROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER TO THE MINISTER
FOR FINANCE OR THE MINISTER’S NOMINEE OF ALLTHE SHARES IN ANGLO IRISH BANK CORPORATIONPUBLIC LIMITED COMPANY,
(B) TO EXTINGUISH CERTAIN RIGHTS IN ANGLO
IRISH BANK,
(C) TO DISAPPLY CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE
COMPANIES ACTS AND OTHER ENACTMENTSIN SO FAR AS THEY RELATE TO ANGLO IRISHBANK,
(D) TO PROVIDE FOR THE REMOVAL OF PERSONS
FROM CERTAIN OFFICES, POSITIONS OREMPLOYMENT WITH ANGLO IRISH BANK ANDTHE APPOINTMENT OF PERSONS TO THOSEOFFICES OR POSITIONS OR THATEMPLOYMENT,
(E) TO PROVIDE FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF AN
ASSESSOR TO ASSESS WHETHER COMPEN-SATION SHOULD BE PAID TO PERSONS WHOSESHARES WERE TRANSFERRED TO THE MINI-STER FOR FINANCE OR WHOSE RIGHTS WEREEXTINGUISHED, AND IF SO TO DETERMINETHE FAIR AND REASONABLE AMOUNT PAY-ABLE AS SUCH COMPENSATION,
(F) TO PROVIDE FOR THE PAYMENT OF ANY SUCH
COMPENSATION,
(G) TO MAKE CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS TO
CERTAIN OTHER ENACTMENTS, AND
(H) TO PROVIDE FOR CONNECTED MATTERS.
[21st January , 2009]
5Definitions.
6[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Anglo Irish Bank” means the company known before its re-regis-
tration by virtue of section 6 as Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Public
Limited Company and, after that re-registration, as Anglo Irish BankCorporation Limited;
“articles” means articles of association;“Assessor” means the person appointed under section 22 ;
“Central Bank” means the Central Bank and Financial Services
Authority of Ireland;
“commercially sensitive information” means information the disclos-
ure of which could reasonably be expected to—
(a) materially prejudice the commercial or industrial interests
of a person or of a group or class of persons, or
(b) prejudice the competitive position of a person in the con-
duct of the person’s business, profession or occupation;
“credit institution” has the same meaning as in the Central Bank
Act 1997;
“extinguished rights” means rights extinguished by section 10(1) in
or in relation to Anglo Irish Bank;
“Governor” has the same meaning as in the Central Bank Act 1942;“memorandum” means memorandum of association;“Minister” means Minister for Finance;“nominee” means nominee of the Minister, including a nominee that
is a company;
“regulated market” has the same meaning as in the European Com-
munities (Markets in Financial Instruments) Regulations 2007 (S.I.No. 60 of 2007);
“Regulatory Authority” has the same meaning as in the Central
Bank Act 1942;
“security interest” includes any mortgage, charge, lien, pledge or
other encumbrance;
“shares” includes ordinary shares, preference shares, share warrants
and stock;
“subsidiary”, in relation to Anglo Irish Bank, has the same meaning
as in section 155 of the Companies Act 1963;
“subsidiary undertaking”, in relation to Anglo Irish Bank, has the
same meaning as in the European Communities (Companies: GroupAccounts) Regulations 1992 (S.I. No. 201 of 1992);
“transferred shares” means the shares in Anglo Irish Bank trans-
ferred to the Minister under section 5 .[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
2.—(1) The Minister has, in the public interest, the functions pro-
vided for under this Act because, after consulting the directors ofAnglo Irish Bank, the Governor and the Regulatory Authority, theMinister is of the opinion that—
(a) there are serious concerns about the viability of Anglo
Irish Bank, or would be if those functions were not per-formed, and
(b) the performance of those functions is necessary, in the
public interest—
(i) to remedy a serious disturbance in the economy of
the State,
(ii) to prevent potential serious damage to the financial
system in the State and ensure the continued stabilityof that system, and
(iii) to preserve the capacity of Anglo Irish Bank to con-
tinue its operations as a going concern.
(2) The Minister may continue to consult the Governor and the
Regulatory Authority in the continuing performance of the Mini-ster’s functions under this Act.
(3) Nothing in this Act prevents the performance by the Central
Bank or the Regulatory Authority of its functions in relation toAnglo Irish Bank or any credit institution authorised or regulated inthe State, or affects any obligation arising under the treaties govern-ing the European Communities (within the meaning given by section1 of the European Communities Act 1972) or the ESCB Statute(within the meaning given by section 2 of the Central Bank Act1942).
3.—(1) The Minister may from time to time specify a relationship
framework in writing to govern the relationship between the Ministeror the Minister’s nominee and Anglo Irish Bank, and may from timeto time amend or revoke any such relationship framework. Therelationship framework shall recognise the separation of Anglo IrishBank from the Minister or the Minister’s nominee and limit inter-vention by the Minister or the Minister’s nominee in the conduct ofAnglo Irish Bank’s business to that necessary to protect the publicinterest. The relationship framework shall at all times comply withregulatory requirements.
(2) Anglo Irish Bank and any nominee of the Minister shall act
in accordance with any relationship framework specified under sub-
section (1) .
(3) The Minister may give a direction in writing to Anglo Irish
Bank requiring it to do or refrain from doing anything the doing orrefraining from doing of which is, in the opinion of the Minister,necessary or expedient in the public interest, subject to regulatoryrequirements.
(4) The Minister may authorise the Minister’s nominee to give a
direction under subsection (3) , and a direction given by a nominee
under such an authority has the same effect as a direction by theMinister.
7Functions
performed in thepublic interest.
Relationship
framework betweenthe Minister andAnglo Irish Bank.S.3
Effect of this Act.
Acquisition of
shares in AngloIrish Bank.
Effect of acquisition
of shares.
8[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(5) Anglo Irish Bank shall comply with a direction under subsec-
tion (3) .
4.—The provisions of this Act have effect notwithstanding any-
thing in—
(a) the Companies Acts or any other enactment, or
(b) the memorandum and articles of Anglo Irish Bank or any
of its subsidiaries or subsidiary undertakings.
5.—(1) On the commencement of this Act, all the shares in Anglo
Irish Bank are transferred to the Minister.
(2) Subsection (1) transfers the shares in Anglo Irish Bank with-
out the necessity for any instrument.
(3) Subsection (1) vests title to the shares in the Minister—
(a) freed from any liability or any equitable or beneficial right,
title or interest (including a security interest) formerlyattaching to any such share, and
(b) together with all rights, benefits and privileges which, on
or after the commencement of this Act, attach or accrueto or arise from any such share.
6.—(1) On the commencement of this Act, the Minister—
(a) is to be taken to be entered in the register of members of
Anglo Irish Bank as the holder of the transferredshares, and
(b) becomes a member of Anglo Irish Bank.
(2) On the commencement of this Act—
(a) Anglo Irish Bank becomes a private company limited by
shares, under the name of “Anglo Irish Bank Corpor-ation Limited”,
(b) its memorandum is to be taken to have been amended to
reflect its status as a private company limited by shares,
(c) its objects clause is to be taken to provide for, as objects,
the doing of anything required by or authorised by thisAct, and acting in support of, connection with and fur-therance of the purposes of this Act,
(d) its articles are to be taken to have been amended to com-
ply with section 33 of the Companies Act 1963 and areto be construed accordingly, and
(e) the registrar of companies shall issue to it a certificate of
incorporation appropriate to a private company limitedby shares.
(3) A share certificate issued before the commencement of this
Act in relation to shares in Anglo Irish Bank is not evidence of theownership, at a time after that commencement, of the shares (other[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
than for the purposes of establishing an entitlement to
compensation).
(4) Anglo Irish Bank may not make a call to pay up any outstand-
ing amounts due in respect of any of the shares at any time whilethe Minister or the Minister’s nominee holds those shares. However,a person who is, at the commencement of this Act, liable to pay toAnglo Irish Bank an amount due in respect of any of those sharesremains so liable notwithstanding anything in this subsection.
(5) Publication of this Act is to be taken to satisfy the requirement
under the European Communities (Single-Member Private LimitedCompanies) Regulations 1994 (S.I. No. 275 of 1994)) to give noticeof Anglo Irish Bank’s becoming a single-member private limitedcompany (within the meaning of those Regulations) as a result ofthe transfer of its shares to the Minister under this Act.
7.—(1) The rights of the Minister as a shareholder in Anglo Irish
Bank are exercisable on and from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Where a right or power in respect of a share in Anglo Irish
Bank is exercisable by attorney or proxy, the Minister may appointan attorney or proxy who may exercise the right or power on theMinister’s behalf.
8.—(1) The Minister may at any time transfer some or all of the
shares that he or she holds in Anglo Irish Bank to a nominee of theMinister specified by the Minister from time to time.
(2) A nominee of the Minister holds shares transferred to him or
her on such terms as the Minister specifies, having regard to thepublic interest and regulatory requirements.
(3) The Minister’s nominee shall not transfer any such share other
than to the Minister or another nominee of the Minister.
(4) The Minister’s nominee may exercise all of the Minister’s
functions in relation to Anglo Irish Bank, being functions expressedto be exercisable by the Minister’s nominee.
(5) The Minister may by order confer on a nominee of the Mini-
ster any other function of the Minister under this Act.
(6) Notice of the making of an order under subsection (5) shall be
published as soon as is practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(7) The nominee specified by the Minister under subsection (1)
may be the National Treasury Management Agency and, if so, thefunctions of that Agency are to be taken to include that of acting asa nominee of the Minister for the purposes of this Act.
9.—(1) In this section “relevant instrument” means an agreement,
licence, security, obligation or other instrument (other than the Cre-dit Institutions (Financial Support) Scheme 2008 (S.I. No. 411 of2008) or an instrument entered into under that Scheme) to whichany of the following is a party or by which any of the followingis bound:
(a) Anglo Irish Bank;
9S.6
General exercise of
Minister’s rights asshareholder.
Minister’s power to
transfer shares tonominee.
Effect on certain
other rights.S.9
10[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(b) any of its subsidiaries or subsidiary undertakings;
(c) any body corporate in which Anglo Irish Bank or any of its
subsidiaries or subsidiary undertakings has any interest.
(2) Any provision in a relevant instrument that would (apart from
this subsection) cause any of the consequences specified in subsection
(4)to follow by virtue of—
(a) the announcement by the Minister of the intention to
enact this Act,
(b) the transfer of shares to the Minister under this Act,
(c) the re-registration of Anglo Irish Bank as a private com-
pany limited by shares by virtue of section 6 ,
(d) the de-listing of any equity or other security by virtue of
section 12 ,o r
(e) any other thing done or authorised to be done pursuant to
or resulting from any provision of this Act,
is of no effect, except to any extent to which the Minister provides
otherwise by order under subsection (5) .
(3) A provision referred to in subsection (2) shall be taken never
to have been of any effect at any time after 14 January 2009, exceptto any extent to which the Minister provides otherwise by orderunder subsection (5) .
(4) The consequences are the following:
(a) the creation of an obligation;
(b) the suspension or extinction (however described, and
whether in whole or in part) of a right or an obligationor the becoming subject to a right or an obligation;
(c) the termination of the relevant instrument concerned or a
right or obligation under it;
(d) the becoming exercisable of a right to terminate the instru-
ment or a right or obligation under it;
(e) the becoming due and payable or capable of being
declared due and payable of an amount;
(f) any other change in the amount or timing of any payment
falling to be made or due to be received by any person;
(g) the becoming exercisable of any right to withhold, net or
set off any payment;
(h) the arising of an event of default or breach of a right;
(i) the becoming exercisable of any right not to advance any
amount, contingent instrument or credit;
(j) the arising of an obligation to provide or transfer a deposit
or collateral;[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(k) a right to enforce a guarantee, indemnity or security
interest (however described);
(l) the triggering of any mandatory prepayment;
(m) any obligation to return collateral or its equivalent;
(n) the cancellation of any obligation to advance any amount
or to provide credit or a contingent instrument;
(o) the becoming maintainable of proceedings to enforce the
instrument, to any extent that such proceedings wouldnot have been maintainable had the shares not beentransferred or had any other thing done or matter arisingby virtue of or in connection with this Act not been doneor not arisen, as the case may be;
(p) the arising or becoming exercisable of any other right or
remedy (whether or not similar in kind to those referredto in paragraphs (a) to(o));
(q) the termination or alteration of an obligation to provide a
service or product.
(5) If the Minister is satisfied that in a particular case or cases the
effect of subsections (1) to(4)in all the circumstances is unduly oner-
ous, or causes undue unfairness or undue hardship, and that it isappropriate in all the circumstances to do so, he or she may by orderprovide that, notwithstanding anything in those subsections, a pro-vision in a relevant instrument that provides for a consequence men-tioned or referred to in subsection (4) has effect to the extent speci-
fied in the order.
(6) An order under subsection (5) —
(a) may make provision in relation to the effect of a pro-
vision in—
(i) a particular relevant instrument,
(ii) relevant instruments of a particular kind, or
(iii) rights held under a relevant instrument, or relevant
instruments of a particular kind, by a particular per-son or a particular class of persons,
(b) in the case of an order that makes provision in relation to
relevant instruments of a particular kind, may specify thekind by reference to any common characteristic of theinstruments concerned,
(c) in the case of an order that makes provision in relation to
rights held by a particular class of persons, may specifythe class by reference to any common characteristic ofthe persons concerned, and
(d) may be expressed to have retrospective effect to a date
falling after 14 January 2009.
(7) Notice of the making of an order under subsection (5) shall be
published as soon as is practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
11S.9S.9
Extinguishment of
certain rights inrelation to shares.
Equitable interests
in shares.
12[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(8) If the Attorney General considers that an order under subsec-
tion (5) contains matter that is commercially sensitive, he or she
may direct—
(a) that the obligations in relation to the order under section
3(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act 1947 are to betaken to be satisfied by the printing, sending to the insti-tutions mentioned in section 3(1)( a) of that Act, publi-
cation and sale of a version of the order from which thecommercially sensitive matter is omitted, or
(b) if the preparation of such a version would be impracti-
cable, or would result in the version being seriously mis-leading, that the order is exempt from the operation ofsection 3(1) of that Act.
(9) A version of an order prepared in accordance with a direction
given by the Attorney General under subsection (8)(a) shall indicate
that matter has been omitted from the version of the order and thegeneral nature of that matter.
(10) A direction given by the Attorney General under subsection
(8)shall be published in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(11) Evidence of a direction given by the Attorney General under
subsection (8) may be given by the production of a copy of Iris
Oifigiu ´ilpurporting to contain the direction.
(12) Nothing in this Act affects the operation of the Asset
Covered Securities Acts 2001 and 2007 in relation to Anglo IrishBank and its subsidiaries and subsidiary undertakings.
10.—(1) On the commencement of this Act, the following rights
are extinguished as against the Minister and Anglo Irish Bank:
(a) rights (however described) to subscribe for shares, or
options over shares, in Anglo Irish Bank arising from orin connection with an individual’s employment by oroffice with Anglo Irish Bank, or any of its subsidiaries orsubsidiary undertakings;
(b) other options or rights held by a person to subscribe for
or otherwise acquire, from Anglo Irish Bank, shares inAnglo Irish Bank.
(2) At any time after the commencement of this Act, Anglo Irish
Bank may resolve to vary the rights attaching to any shares in acompany that is its subsidiary or subsidiary undertaking. Such resol-ution has full force and effect from the date of the resolution not-withstanding anything in the Companies Acts or the memorandumor articles of the company concerned.
11.—(1) If any transferred shares were subject, immediately
before the commencement of this Act, to an equitable or beneficialright, title or interest (including a security interest), the person whowas the legal owner of those shares immediately before that com-mencement holds any sum paid to him or her as compensation forthe acquisition of those shares in trust for the person who held theright, title or interest in proportion to the entitlement concerned.[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(2) A person who holds money in trust for another person under
subsection (1) does so on the same terms (as nearly as possible) as
those of the right, title or interest referred to in that subsection.
12.—(1) On the commencement of this Act, any listing of shares
of Anglo Irish Bank is discontinued without the need for any othernotice to, or the consent of, any person.
(2) In subsection (1) “listing” has the same meaning as in the
European Communities (Admissions to Listing and MiscellaneousProvisions) Regulations 2007 (S.I. No. 286 of 2007).
(3) The Minister may by order make provision for discontinuing
the admission to, or trading on, a market (including a regulatedmarket) of any securities (other than those described in subsection
(1)) that have been issued by Anglo Irish Bank.
(4) Notice of the making of an order under subsection (3) shall be
published as soon as is practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
13.—(1) Subsections (1) and (2) of section 57DF (inserted by the
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act 2004)of the Central Bank Act 1942 (in this section called the “Act of1942”) do not apply with respect to a regulatory document or a policydocument that concerns Anglo Irish Bank.
(2) The Minister may by order re-apply either or both of subsec-
tions (1) and (2) of section 57DF of the Act of 1942 in relation toa regulatory document or a policy document that concerns AngloIrish Bank.
(3) An order under subsection (2) may re-apply either or both
of subsections (1) and (2) of section 57DF of the Act of 1942 inrelation to—
(a) a particular regulatory document or policy document, or
(b) regulatory documents or policy documents of a particular
class.
(4) Notice of the making of an order under subsection (2) shall be
published as soon as is practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(5) The disapplication of subsections (1) and (2) of section 57DF
of the Act of 1942 by subsection (1) does not affect the right of the
Regulatory Authority to consult—
(a) the Consultative Consumer Panel pursuant to section
57CY of that Act, or
(b) the Consultative Industry Panel pursuant to section 57DB
of that Act.
(6) Section 57DE(3) of the Act of 1942 does not apply with
respect to any consultation with the Consultative Consumer Panel orthe Consultative Industry Panel that concerns or may concern AngloIrish Bank during a period when subsections (1) and (2) of section57DF of that Act were disapplied under subsection (1) .
(7) Paragraphs ( b)t o( f) of section 28(1) of the Central Bank
Act 1971 do not apply in relation to Anglo Irish Bank or any of
13S.11
De-listing.
Disapplication, etc.,
of certain provisionsof Central BankActs.S.13
Disapplication, etc.,
of certain lawsrelating tocompanies.
14[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
its subsidiaries or subsidiary undertakings while the Minister or the
Minister’s nominee is a member of it.
(8) In this section, a term also used in Part VIIC (inserted by the
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act 2004)of the Act of 1942 has the same meaning as in that Part.
(9) This section has effect notwithstanding section 2(3) .
14.—(1) Nothing done under this Act constitutes a re-organis-
ation measure for the purposes of—
(a) the European Communities (Re-organisation and Wind-
ing-Up of Credit Institutions) Regulations 2004 (S.I. No.198 of 2004), or
(b) the European Communities (Reorganisation and Winding-
up of Insurance Undertakings) Regulations 2003 (S.I. No.168 of 2003).
(2) During the period of 90 days (or any longer period, up to 6
months, prescribed by the Minister by order) after any change thatwould, but for this subsection, require to be disclosed in the businessletters and emails and on the website of Anglo Irish Bank, the pro-visions of the Companies Acts requiring such disclosure do not applyto it.
(3) Notice of the making of an order under subsection (2) shall be
published as soon as is practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(4) The following provisions of the Companies Acts:
(a) sections 60(1), 72, 81 to 85 and 200(1) of the Companies
Act 1963;
(b) sections 41 and 45 of the Companies (Amendment) Act
1983;
(c) section 26(6) and Part IV of the Companies Act 1990;
do not apply in relation to Anglo Irish Bank or its subsidiaries or
subsidiary undertakings while the Minister or the Minister’s nomineeis a member of Anglo Irish Bank.
(5) No other provision of law or of the memorandum or articles
of Anglo Irish Bank that would otherwise prevent or restrict theMinister or the Minister’s nominee from exercising all of the powers,rights and entitlements of members of a company applies to it or tothe membership of it by the Minister or the Minister’s nominee.
(6) Notwithstanding subsections (4) and (5), the Minister or the
Minister’s nominee may, after consulting the directors of Anglo IrishBank, act in accordance with any provision (in whole or in part)referred to in either of those subsections as if that provision con-tinued to apply.
(7) A petition may not be brought for the winding up of Anglo
Irish Bank under Part VI of the Companies Act 1963 without theleave of the Minister.[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(8) The Minister may by order re-apply any provision referred to
insubsection (4) in relation to Anglo Irish Bank or any of its subsidi-
aries or subsidiary undertakings.
(9) Notice of the making of an order under subsection (8) shall be
published as soon as is practicable in Iris Oifigiu ´il.
(10) Nothing in this section has the effect of disapplying any
requirement to keep records, or record resolutions, in an appro-priate form.
(11) Nothing in this section has the effect of—
(a) rendering lawful any contravention of any provision
referred to in this section that took place before the com-mencement of this Act,
(b) relieving any person from any obligation to comply, at any
time before the commencement of this Act, with any suchprovision, or
(c) prejudicing any proceedings brought or to be brought in
relation to a contravention, or the breach of an obli-gation, referred to in paragraph (a) or(b).
15.—(1) Parts 2 and 3 of the Competition Act 2002 do not apply
with respect to the acquisition by the Minister, or the transfer by theMinister to the Minister’s nominee, of shares in Anglo Irish Bankunder this Act.
(2) Section 7 of the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act
2008 does not apply with respect to the acquisition by the Minister,or the transfer by the Minister to the Minister’s nominee, of sharesin Anglo Irish Bank under this Act.
16.—(1) Chapter VI of Part II of the Central Bank Act 1989 does
not apply in relation to the acquisition by the Minister, or thetransfer by the Minister to the Minister’s nominee, of shares in AngloIrish Bank under this Act.
(2) Regulation 14 (other than paragraph (9) of that Regulation)
of the European Communities (Licensing and Supervision of CreditInstitutions) Regulations 1992 (S.I. No. 395 of 1992) does not applyin relation to the acquisition by the Minister, or the transfer by theMinister to the Minister’s nominee, of shares in Anglo Irish Bankunder this Act.
(3) Part 4 (except paragraphs (3) and (4) of Article 40C) of the
European Communities (Life Assurance) Framework Regulations1994 (S.I. No. 360 of 1994) does not apply in relation to the acquis-ition by the Minister, or the transfer by the Minister to the Minister’snominee, of shares in Anglo Irish Bank under this Act.
(4) Neither the acquisition by the Minister, nor the transfer by the
Minister to the Minister’s nominee, of shares in Anglo Irish Bankunder this Act is—
(a) an offer, a takeover or any other relevant transaction
within the meaning of the Irish Takeover Panel Act1997, or
15S.14
Disapplication of
certain provisions ofCompetition Act2002 and CreditInstitutions(Financial Support)Act 2008.
Disapplication of
certainrequirements inrelation to notice ofacquisition ofshares.S.16
Suspension, etc., of
articles of AngloIrish Bank.
16[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(b) a takeover bid within the meaning of the European Com-
munities Takeover Bids (Directive 2004/25/EC) Regu-lations 2006 (S.I. No. 255 of 2006).
(5) The following do not apply to the acquisition by the Minister,
or the transfer by the Minister to the Minister’s nominee, of sharesin Anglo Irish Bank under this Act:
(a) Part 5 of the Transparency (Directive 2004/109/EC) Regu-
lations 2007 (S.I. No. 277 of 2007);
(b) Part 7 of the Transparency Rules made in June 2007 by
the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority undersection 22 of the Investment Funds, Companies and Mis-cellaneous Provisions Act 2006.
(6) Publication of this Act is to be taken to satisfy any other obli-
gation of the Minister under any law to give notice of, or do anyother thing in relation to, the acquisition by the Minister, or thetransfer by the Minister to the Minister’s nominee of shares in AngloIrish Bank under this Act.
(7) This section has effect notwithstanding section 2(3) .
17.—(1) No provision of the Companies Acts nor the memor-
andum nor articles of Anglo Irish Bank requiring any notice to begiven by Anglo Irish Bank or a member, or any consent to beobtained, before doing anything applies in relation to that Bankwhile the Minister or the Minister’s nominee is a member of it. Inparticular, the Minister or the Minister’s nominee may at any timewithout any notice or consent otherwise necessary—
(a) hold any meeting (including a general meeting) of Anglo
Irish Bank,
(b) pass, at a meeting convened without notice, any resolution,
(c) take a decision in the way set out in Regulation 9 of the
European Communities (Single-Member Private LimitedCompanies) Regulations 1994 (S.I. No. 275 of 1994), butwithout the limitation imposed by paragraph (2) of thatRegulation, and
(d) pass a written resolution in the way set out in section
141(8)( a) of the Companies Act 1963, but without the
limitation imposed by section 141(8)( c) of that Act.
(2) Where the memorandum and articles of Anglo Irish Bank are
altered by a resolution under paragraph (b) ,(c)or(d)ofsubsection
(1), the alteration takes effect immediately, without any necessity for
regulatory or other consent.
(3) The articles of Anglo Irish Bank are to be taken to contain
regulation 6 of Part II of Table A in the First Schedule to the Com-panies Act 1963.
(4) The provisions of the articles of Anglo Irish Bank authorising
its directors to issue and allot shares are to be taken not to have hadeffect during the period beginning on 15 January 2009 and ending atthe commencement of this Act.[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
18.—(1) The Minister or the Minister’s nominee may, after con-
sulting the directors of Anglo Irish Bank, change its financial year.
(2) Any accounts, reports or returns that would be required by
law (other than a law relating to taxation) or the articles of AngloIrish Bank to be prepared or submitted for a financial year shall, inrespect of the portion of the financial year immediately preceding achange of financial year by virtue of subsection (1) , be included and
form part of the accounts, reports or returns, as the case may be, forthe first year of the changed financial year.
19.—(1) The Minister or the Minister’s nominee may remove any
person from—
(a) a position of director of Anglo Irish Bank or any of its
subsidiaries or subsidiary undertakings,
(b) being its secretary or the secretary of any of its subsidiaries
or subsidiary undertakings,
(c) any of the following:
(i) a position of employment with it or any of its subsidi-
aries or subsidiary undertakings;
(ii) an executive position (including the chief executive
and any such position held by virtue of being a direc-tor or secretary of it or any of its subsidiaries or sub-
sidiary undertakings) in it or any of its subsidiariesor subsidiary undertakings;
(iii) a consultancy to it or any of its subsidiaries or subsidi-
ary undertakings;
whether or not there is a contractual relationship
between the person and it, or between the person and thesubsidiary or subsidiary undertaking, as the case requires,
(d) being its auditor or the auditor of any of its subsidiaries or
subsidiary undertakings,
(e) being the trustee of a pension fund established or other-
wise in existence primarily for the benefit of one or moreof, or any class or classes of, the following:
(i) officers or employees of it or any of its subsidiaries or
subsidiary undertakings;
(ii) former officers or employees of it or any of its subsidi-
aries or subsidiary undertakings;
(iii) spouses and dependants of deceased former officers
or employees of it or any of its subsidiaries or sub-sidiary undertakings, or
(f) being the trustee of an employee share scheme established
for the benefit of employees of it or any of its subsidiariesor subsidiary undertakings.
17Minister may alter
financial year ofAnglo Irish Bank.
Removal of
directors, etc., ofAnglo Irish Bank.S.19
Appointment of
directors, etc., ofAnglo Irish Bank.
18[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(2) The removal of a person by virtue of subsection (1) —
(a) has effect without the need for any notice being given,
meeting being called, resolution being passed or consentbeing obtained, and
(b) may be expressed to take effect immediately and, if so
expressed, has that effect.
(3) Subsection (1) is in addition to any power of the Minister or
the Minister’s nominee under the Companies Acts or the memor-andum or articles of Anglo Irish Bank to remove a person from anoffice or position referred to in subsection (1) .
(4) The functions of the Minister or the Minister’s nominee under
this section shall be exercised only in the public interest (includingthe restoration of public confidence in Anglo Irish Bank) and subjectto regulatory requirements.
(5) Nothing in this section deprives a person removed of any right
to compensation or damages for the loss of his or her office orappointment. However—
(a) a court, tribunal or rights commissioner may not grant any
remedy that would have the effect of preventing orrestraining the Minister or the Minister’s nominee fromexercising his or her functions under subsection (1) , and
(b) a court, tribunal or rights commissioner may not make any
order under the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2007 forthe reinstatement or re-engagement of such a person.
(6) In this section “director” includes a director appointed under
section 20 .
20.—(1) With the consent of the Central Bank, the Minister or
the Minister’s nominee may appoint a person as—
(a) a director of Anglo Irish Bank or any of its subsidiaries or
subsidiary undertakings,
(b) its chief executive or the chief executive of any of its sub-
sidiaries or subsidiary undertakings,
(c) its secretary or the secretary of any of its subsidiaries or
subsidiary undertakings,
(d) its auditor or the auditor of any of its subsidiaries or sub-
sidiary undertakings,
(e) the trustee of a pension fund established or otherwise in
existence primarily for the benefit of one or more of, orany classes or classes of, the following:
(i) officers or employees of it or any of its subsidiaries or
subsidiary undertakings;
(ii) former officers or employees of it or any of its subsidi-
aries or subsidiary undertakings;[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(iii) spouses and dependants of deceased former officers
or employees of it or any of its subsidiaries or sub-sidiary undertakings,
or
(f) the trustee of an employee share scheme established for
the benefit of employees of it or any of its subsidiaries orsubsidiary undertakings,
whether any vacancy concerned arises under section 19(1) or
otherwise.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the appointment of a person under
this section may be expressed to take effect immediately and, if soexpressed, has that effect.
(3) A person appointed under this section holds office for the dur-
ation, and upon the terms and conditions, that the Minister or theMinister’s nominee determines.
(4) An appointment under subsection (1) is effective—
(a) even if the person appointed does not hold any share
qualification required by the memorandum or articles ofAnglo Irish Bank or the subsidiary or subsidiary under-taking (as the case may be) concerned, and
(b) whether or not he or she satisfies any other requirement
for appointment under that memorandum or thosearticles.
(5) S ubsections (1) to(4)are in addition to any power of the Mini-
ster or the Minister’s nominee under the memorandum or articles ofAnglo Irish Bank to appoint a person to an office or positionreferred to in subsection (1) .
(6) The functions of the Minister or the Minister’s nominee under
this section shall be exercised only in the public interest (includingthe restoration of public confidence in Anglo Irish Bank) and subjectto regulatory requirements.
21.—(1) While the Minister or the Minister’s nominee is a
member of Anglo Irish Bank, none of the persons mentioned in sub-
section (2) is to be taken to be a shadow director (within the meaning
given by section 27(1) of the Companies Act 1990) nor what is knownas a de facto director nor (unless otherwise appointed as a director)
as a person discharging managerial responsibilities of—
(a) Anglo Irish Bank,
(b) any of its subsidiaries, or
(c) any of its subsidiary undertakings.
(2) The persons are—
(a) the Minister,
(b) the Minister’s nominee,
19S.20
No shadow or de
facto directorship.S.21
Appointment of
Assessor.
20[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(c) any person to whom the Minister’s functions under this
Act are delegated, whether under the National TreasuryManagement Agency Act 1990 or otherwise,
(d) the Governor,
(e) any director of the Central Bank,
(f) any member of the Regulatory Authority,
(g) officers of, or consultants or advisors to, and persons
employed by or under, or acting on behalf of, the Mini-ster, the Central Bank or the Regulatory Authority.
22.—(1) The Minister shall, as soon as he or she considers it
appropriate in the circumstances, appoint a person (referred to inthis Act as the “Assessor”) to determine, in accordance with thisAct, the fair and reasonable aggregate value of the transferred sharesand the extinguished rights and the consequent amount of compen-sation, if any, payable to persons in respect of those shares andthose rights .
(2) In deciding whether it is an appropriate time to appoint the
Assessor, the Minister shall have regard to the public interest.
(3) In appointing a person as the Assessor, the Minister shall
ensure that the person has, in the Minister’s opinion, significantknowledge or experience of the financial services sector.
(4) The Minister may not appoint a person as the Assessor unless
the Minister is satisfied that the person would, if appointed, have noconflict of a material nature between any personal or businessinterests and the performance of the Assessor’s functions.
(5) A person is not eligible to be appointed as the Assessor if
the person—
(a) is a member of either House of the Oireachtas or is, with
the person’s consent, nominated as a candidate for elec-tion as such a member,
(b) is a member of the European Parliament or is, with the
person’s consent, nominated as a candidate for electionas such a member or to fill a vacancy in the membershipof that Parliament, or
(c) is a member of a local authority (within the meaning of
the Local Government Act 2001) or is, with the person’sconsent, nominated as a candidate for election as sucha member.
(6) For the purpose of facilitating the performance of his or her
functions under this Act, the Assessor has the powers set out in theSchedule and may exercise, for any particular purpose, such of those
powers as he or she, in his or her sole discretion, determines areappropriate for that purpose.
(7) In the performance of his or her functions under this Act,
the Assessor—
(a) is independent,[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(b) shall act as an expert only, and
(c) shall act as expeditiously as possible consistent with
fairness.
(8) The Assessor shall complete the performance of his or her
functions within such period as the Minister specifies from time totime.
23.—(1) The Minister shall pay or reimburse such expenses of a
person appointed as Assessor (including remuneration) as the Mini-ster determines.
(2) The Assessor may, with the consent of the Minister, engage
such staff or other persons as the Assessor considers necessary toassist him or her in the performance of his or her functions, and shalltake reasonable measures to satisfy himself or herself that no personso engaged is affected by a material conflict of interest.
24.—(1) The following persons and no others may make sub-
missions to the Assessor in respect of the aggregate value of thetransferred shares and extinguished rights:
(a) the Central Bank;
(b) the Governor;
(c) a person appointed by the Assessor under subsection
(4)(a) to represent a class of persons whose shares were
transferred to the Minister by section 5 or whose rights
have been extinguished under section 10 ;
(d) a person—
(i) whose shares were transferred to the Minister by
section 5 ,o r
(ii) whose rights have been extinguished under section 10 ,
but who is not in a class for which, under subsection
(4)(a) , the Assessor has appointed a representative;
(e) the Minister, and, if the Minister so specifies, the National
Treasury Management Agency;
(f) any other person from whom the Assessor invites a
submission.
(2) The Assessor may invite a submission under subsection (1)(f)
from a person whose shares were transferred to the Minister bysection 5 or whose rights have been extinguished under section 10
even if the person is in a class of persons for which the Assessor hasappointed a representative under subsection (4)(a) .
(3) A submission to the Assessor under subsection (1) shall be
made in accordance with procedures determined by the Assessorunder subsection (4) .
(4) Subject to any regulations made by the Minister under section
36, the Assessor shall determine, in his or her sole discretion, pro-
cedures for—
21S.22
Expenses, etc., of
Assessor andengagement of staff.
Submissions to
Assessor.S.24
Determination of
fair and reasonableaggregate value.
22[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(a) the appointment of representatives of persons holding the
same class or classes of shares or having substantially thesame interests,
(b) the form and type of submissions to be made to the
Assessor,
(c) the means by which confidential information should be
protected from public disclosure, and
(d) performing any of the Assessor’s functions.
25.—(1) The Assessor shall determine the fair and reasonable
aggregate value of the transferred shares of each class and the exting-uished rights as at 15 January 2009 for the purposes of the paymentof fair and reasonable compensation for the acquisition of thoseshares and the extinction of those rights.
(2) The Assessor shall determine the value referred to in subsec-
tion (1) —
(a) on the basis of the true financial state of Anglo Irish Bank
on 15 January 2009, taking into account the underlyingmarket values of Anglo Irish Bank’s assets and the extentof its actual, contingent and prospective liabilities atthat date,
(b) having regard to the rights attaching to each class of trans-
ferred shares, and
(c) assuming that no financial assistance, investment or
guarantee (other than the guarantee already providedunder the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act2008) would in future be provided to or made in AngloIrish Bank, directly or indirectly, by the State.
(3) In determining the value referred to in subsection (1) , the
Assessor shall have reference to—
(a) the quoted price of its shares at the close of business on
15 January 2009, and the movements in that price duringsuch period as the Assessor considers appropriate,
(b) any relevant information about the business of Anglo Irish
Bank as of 15 January 2009, whether publicly availableor not,
(c) whether Anglo Irish Bank was, on 15 January 2009, unable
or likely to become unable to continue as a going concernin the short, medium or long term, or that there was amaterial risk of its not being able to do so,
(d) the viability of its business model,
(e) its capital and solvency levels on 15 January 2009,
(f) its liquidity,
(g) the terms of the Credit Institutions (Financial Support)
Scheme 2008 (S.I. No. 411 of 2008),[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(h) any access that Anglo Irish Bank had or would be likely
to have had to funding from the central banks of the euroarea, including the Central Bank and the European Cen-tral Bank,
(i) any relevant evidence that the Assessor obtains in the per-
formance of his or her functions,
(j) any submissions made to the Assessor, and
(k) any other relevant matter.
(4) The Assessor shall make the determination required by sub-
section (1) on the basis of the information and evidence available to
him or her at the time he or she carries out his or her function.
(5) A conclusion drawn or finding made by the Assessor in mak-
ing the determination required by subsection (1) does not amount to
a finding of fact for any purpose other than the purposes of this Act.
(6) Nothing in this Act prevents the Assessor from determining
that the amount of fair and reasonable compensation to be paid inrelation to the transferred shares or the extinguished rights is nil.
(7) Whenever the Minister so requests, the Assessor shall report
to the Minister as to his or her progress in making the determinationrequired by this section.
26.—(1) Before making a report to the Minister under section 27 ,
the Assessor shall send a draft of his or her report to—
(a) each person who made a submission to the Assessor, and
(b) any other person, or each person in any class of persons,
that the Minister specifies in writing,
inviting the person to make written submissions concerning the draft
report and specifying a reasonable period in which to do so.
(2) The Assessor may omit from the draft report any evidence or
material if including that evidence or material would disclose com-mercially sensitive information or would otherwise be contrary to thepublic interest.
(3) Before submitting the report to the Minister under section 27 ,
the Assessor shall consider any submissions made in accordance withthe Assessor’s invitation under subsection (1) and shall revise the
report as appropriate.
(4) A person to whom the Assessor sends a copy of a draft report
under subsection (1) commits an offence if he or she discloses the
report or its contents or any part of the report or its contents to anyperson other than for the purpose of obtaining professional advice.
(5) A person to whom a draft report of the Assessor is disclosed
(whether under subsection (4) for the purposes of obtaining pro-
fessional advice or otherwise) commits an offence if he or she dis-closes the report or its contents or any part of the report or its con-tents to any other person other than for the purpose of obtainingprofessional advice.
23S.25
Circulation of draft
report for comment.Report by Assessor.
Compensation
Scheme.
24[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
27.—(1) When the Assessor has determined, in accordance with
this Act, the aggregate value of the transferred shares and extingu-ished rights, the Assessor shall report to the Minister—
(a) the fair and reasonable aggregate value of the transferred
shares and extinguished rights, and the consequent totalamount payable as fair and reasonable compensation,
(b) the value attributable to each class of share or extingu-
ished right that the Assessor considers gives rise to a validclaim for payment of compensation, and
(c) whether the Assessor considers that the payment of
interest on the amounts payable is appropriate in the cir-cumstances, and if so what the rate of interest should be.
(2) In the report under subsection (1) the Assessor shall set out—
(a) a summary of the evidence on which the Assessor relied
in making his or her determination, and
(b) the Assessor’s reasons for making the determination.
(3) In the report under subsection (1) the Assessor shall not iden-
tify any claimant for compensation.
(4) The Minister shall make such arrangements as are necessary
for sufficient funds to be made available out of the Central Fund orthe growing produce thereof to enable payments of compensation tobe made in accordance with the Assessor’s report under subsection
(1).
(5) The Minister shall cause the Assessor’s report under subsec-
tion (1) to be published as soon as is practicable.
(6) The Minister may omit from the published report any evi-
dence or material if including that evidence or material would dis-close commercially sensitive information or would otherwise be con-trary to the public interest.
28.—(1) Where the Assessor has reported to the Minister under
section 27 that compensation is payable to persons for transferred
shares and extinguished rights, the Minister shall, within one monthof being notified of the determination (or, in the event of any appealor judicial review, within one month after the conclusion of theappeal or judicial review), make a scheme (in this section referredto as the “Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Compensation Scheme”)providing procedures for—
(a) the making of a claim for compensation,
(b) if necessary, facilitating the calculation of the amount pay-
able to each person concerned,
(c) the payment of those amounts to those persons, and
(d) if the Assessor considers that the payment of interest is
appropriate in the circumstances, the payment of thatinterest.[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the
Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Compensation Scheme may providefor the following:
(a) the correction by the Assessor of any clerical, compu-
tational or typographical error, or any error of a similarnature, contained in the Assessor’s report under section
27or any determination of compensation payable to a
person;
(b) how notice is to be given to persons as to whether their
claims for compensation have been accepted or rejected.
29.—(1) The Assessor shall compile a list, in such a form as the
Assessor considers appropriate, of the persons entitled to compen-sation in relation to transferred shares and extinguished rights.
(2) The Assessor may compile the list referred to in subsection
(1)from—
(a) the register of members of Anglo Irish Bank immediately
before the commencement of this Act,
(b) any records kept by Anglo Irish Bank of options or rights
of the kind referred to in section 10(1)(a) and (b), and
(c) any other record that the Assessor reasonably believes to
be relevant and reliable.
(3) The Assessor may require a person claiming compensation to
provide evidence, in such form as the Assessor requires, in supportof the claim. If the Assessor requires evidence in support of such aclaim, he or she is not obliged to consider the claim if no evidence,or incomplete or insufficient evidence, is provided.
30.—(1) The value for the purposes of compensation of a trans-
ferred share of a particular class is to be determined by—
(a) apportioning the fair and reasonable aggregate value of
the transferred shares determined under section 25
between classes of shares, and
(b) dividing the value determined under paragraph (a) for a
class of shares by the number of shares of that class actu-ally issued on 15 January 2009.
(2) In determining the compensation (if any) payable in respect
of a class of transferred shares, the Assessor shall have regard to therights attaching to shares of that class.
(3) Subject to subsection (4) , the value for the purposes of com-
pensation of an extinguished right is to be taken as the proportionof the value of a transferred share of the appropriate class that theAssessor considers reasonable in the circumstances.
(4) The value of an extinguished right that is an option or right
to acquire a share of a particular class is to be taken to be nil if thetrue value of a share of that class in Anglo Irish Bank (assessed ona fully diluted basis, as if all options and other rights to acquire sharesof that class had been taken up or exercised) on 15 January 2009 wasless than the value at which the option or right was exercisable.
25S.28
Claims for
compensation.
Amount payable as
compensation.Review of
determination ofcompensation, etc.
26[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
31.—(1) An appeal lies to the Irish Financial Services Appeals
Tribunal (in this section called “the Tribunal”) against—
(a) the Assessor’s determination under section 25 ,
(b) the Assessor’s rejection of a person’s claim for compen-
sation, or
(c) the Assessor’s determination of the sum that a person is
entitled to as compensation.
(2) This section applies to the Minister in the same manner as it
applies to a person who has or claims a right to compensation.
(3) The Assessor is to be the respondent to an appeal under sub-
section (1) .
(4) On hearing an appeal under subsection (1) , the Tribunal may
substitute its own determination or confirm, annul or vary the deter-mination or rejection appealed from and may make any other conse-quential order.
(5) The Tribunal shall determine an appeal under subsection (1)
as expeditiously as possible consistent with fairness and on the basisof the material that was before the Assessor unless the Tribunal isof the opinion that a further submission or submissions should besought.
(6) In deciding, for the purposes of an appeal under subsection
(1)(a) , whether the Assessor’s determination should be confirmed,
annulled or varied, the test to be applied by the Tribunal is whetherthe appellant has established, as a matter of probability, taking intoaccount the degree of expertise and specialist knowledge possessedby the Assessor and taking the process as a whole, that the determi-nation was vitiated by a serious and significant error or a series ofsuch errors.
(7) Section 25 applies to the Tribunal in making its decision in an
appeal under subsection (1)(a) to the same extent as it did to the
Assessor in making his or her determination under that section.
(8) The provisions (except subsections (1) and (4) of section 57L)
of Chapter 3 of Part VIIA (inserted by the Central Bank and Finan-cial Services Authority of Ireland Act 2003) of the Central Bank Act1942 apply to an appeal under this section, except that references inthat Chapter to the Regulatory Authority are to be read as refer-ences to the Assessor.
(9) For the purposes of determining an appeal under this section,
the Tribunal may refer a question of law to the High Court in accord-ance with section 57AJ (inserted by the Central Bank and FinancialServices Authority of Ireland Act 2003) of the Central Bank Act1942.
(10) If the Tribunal is satisfied, on examining the documents in
relation to an appeal under subsection (1) , that the appeal raises no
issue that the Tribunal has not already determined in connectionwith another such appeal, it may—
(a) strike out the first-mentioned appeal, or[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(b) determine it without a hearing.
(11) In addition, if the Tribunal is satisfied that a number of
appeals before it raise substantially the same issues—
(a) it may select one of those appeals as representative of
all, and
(b) it may treat its decision on that appeal as determining
those issues, or some of them, in each of the otherappeals.
(12) The Tribunal may dismiss an appeal at any stage if the Tri-
bunal is of the opinion that it has been made in bad faith or is frivol-ous, vexatious or misconceived or relates to a trivial matter.
(13) The decision of the Tribunal on an appeal under this section
(including a decision made under subsection (10) without a hearing
and a decision that a decision on a particular appeal is to be taken,under subsection (11) , to determine an issue or issues in a number
of appeals) is final.
32.—(1) Leave shall not be granted for judicial review of the
Assessor’s determination under section 25 or any other decision in
relation to compensation unless—
(a) either—
(i) the application for judicial review is made to the High
Court within one month after the Assessor’s reportto the Minister, or the notice to the applicant of thedecision, as the case may be, or
(ii) the Court is satisfied that—
(I) there are substantial reasons why the application
was not made within that period, and
(II) it is just, in all the circumstances to grant leave,
having regard to the interests of other affectedpersons, and
(b) the Court is satisfied that the application raises a substan-
tial issue for the Court’s determination.
(2) The Court may make such order on the hearing of the judicial
review as it thinks fit, including an order remitting the matter backto the Assessor with such directions as the Court thinks appropriateor necessary.
(3) This section applies to the Minister in the same manner as it
applies to a person who has or claims a right to compensation.
33.—(1) The expenses incurred by the Minister in the admini-
stration of this Act shall be paid out of money provided by theOireachtas and shall be repaid to the Minister from the funds ofAnglo Irish Bank.
(2) The expenses incurred in respect of the Assessor by the Mini-
ster, and any other expenses or expenditure incurred by the Ministerunder this Act, shall be paid from the funds of Anglo Irish Bank or,
27S.31
Limitation of
judicial review ofthe Assessor’sdetermination.
Expenses, etc., of
Minister.S.33
Minister may issue
securities, etc.
Offences under this
Act.
Regulations —
facilitation ofperformance offunctions.
Regulations —
generalimplementation ofthis Act.
28[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
if that is not possible in the circumstances and the Minister considers
it appropriate, out of the Central Fund or the growing producethereof.
34.—For the purposes of this Act and to enable the Minister to
provide funds for Anglo Irish Bank’s continued operations, the Mini-ster may, whenever and so often as he or she thinks fit, create andissue securities—
(a) bearing interest at such rate as he or she thinks fit, or no
interest,
(b) for such cash or non-cash consideration or deferred con-
sideration as he or she thinks fit, and
(c) subject to such terms and conditions as to repayment,
repurchase, cancellation and redemption or any othermatter as he or she thinks fit.
35.—A person guilty of an offence under this Act is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 5 years or both.
36.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for the purpose of
facilitating the performance by the Assessor or the Minister or theMinister’s nominee of his or her functions under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) , the Mini-
ster may in particular make provision for the procedures to be usedto make submissions to the Assessor, including, where the Assessorconsiders that a class of persons rather than a single person is con-cerned with a particular issue and the issue can be properly dealtwith by hearing a single person as a representative of the class, pro-cedures for appointing a person to represent the class.
(3) Regulations made by the Minister under this section may con-
tain such incidental, supplementary and consequential provisions asappear to the Minister to be necessary or expedient for the purposesof the regulations.
(4) Regulations made under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after they are made and,if a resolution annulling them is passed by either such House withinthe next 21 days on which that House has sat after the regulationsare laid before it, the regulations shall be annulled accordingly butwithout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done underthe regulations.
37.—(1) The Minister may, in respect of any difficulty that arises
in the operation of this Act, make regulations to do anything thatappears necessary or expedient for bringing this Act into operation.
(2) Regulations made under this section may contain such inci-
dental, supplementary and consequential provisions as appear to the[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
Minister to be necessary or expedient for the purposes of the
regulations.
(3) Where the Minister proposes to make regulations under this
section—
(a) he or she shall, before doing so, consult with any other
Minister of the Government that the Minister considersappropriate having regard to the functions of that otherMinister of the Government in relation to the proposedregulations,
(b) he or she shall cause a draft of the proposed regulations
to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas, and
(c) he or she shall not make the regulations unless and until
a resolution approving of the draft has been passed byeach such House.
38.—(1) Section 54 of the Finance Act 1970 is amended by
inserting the following after subsection (7C) (inserted by the CreditInstitutions (Financial Support) Act 2008):
“(7D) The Minister for Finance—
(a) may engage in such transactions of a normal banking
nature with any person as he or she considersappropriate—
(i) in connection with the performance of his or her
functions under the Anglo Irish Bank Corpor-
ation Act 2009 , and
(ii) for the purpose of the better management of any
indebtedness incurred by the Minister underthat Act,
and
(b) may for the purpose of those transactions issue such
funds from the Exchequer as he or she considersappropriate.
The expenses and other costs incurred by the Minister for Fin-
ance in connection with or arising out of those transactions shallbe charged on the Central Fund or the growing producethereof.”.
(2) The First Schedule to the National Treasury Management
Agency Act 1990 is amended as follows:
(a) by substituting “under the following enactments:” for
“under—”;
(b) by renumbering the paragraphs numbered ( gg)t o( ggggg )
as paragraphs ( ga)t o( gd) respectively;
(c) by inserting after paragraph ( gd) (inserted by the Credit
Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008 and renum-bered by paragraph ( b)):
29S.37
Amendment of
other Acts.S.38
Short title.
Section 22(6) .
30[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
“(ge) section 54(7D) (inserted by the Anglo Irish
Bank Corporation Act 2009 ) of the Finance
Act 1970,”;
(d) by deleting “and” after paragraph ( r);
(e) by inserting after paragraph ( s) (inserted by the Credit
Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008):
“(t)subsections (3) and (4)ofsection 3, and section
34,of the Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 ”.
(3) Schedule 2 (inserted by the Central Bank and Financial
Services Authority of Ireland Act 2003) to the Central Bank Act1942 is amended by inserting the following in Part 1 after the itemrelating to the Consumer Protection Act 2007:
“
Anglo Irish Bank Corporation The whole Act, other than
Act 2009 sec tion 2
”.
39.—This Act may be cited as the Anglo Irish Bank Corporation
Act 2009.
SCHEDULE
Powers to Require Persons to Give Evidence or Produce
Documents
Assessor may require persons to give evidence or produce
documents.
1. (1) If the Assessor believes on reasonable grounds that a per-
son may be able to give evidence, or to produce a document, thatrelates to a matter concerning the performance or fulfilment of anyof the Assessor’s functions or objectives, he or she may serve on theperson a notice requiring the person—
(a) to appear before the Assessor to give evidence about the
matter, or
(b) to produce the document for examination.
(2) The notice shall—
(a) specify the matter to which the evidence relates, or specify
or describe the document to be produced, as the caserequires, and
(b) in the case of a notice to appear before the Assessor to
give evidence—
(i) specify the date, time and place at which the person
is required to appear before the Assessor, and
(ii) state whether and to what extent the evidence is to be
given orally or on affidavit.[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(3) The notice may require the person concerned to appear before
a specified member of the Assessor’s staff and, if it does so, a refer-ence in this Schedule to the Assessor is to be read as including thestaff member.
Offence of failing to appear before Assessor.
2. (1) A person commits an offence if, having been required to
appear before the Assessor in compliance with a requirement madeunder paragraph 1 , the person fails to comply with the requirement,
and has not been excused, or released from further attendance, bythe Assessor.
(2) Subparagraph (1) does not apply if the person has a reason-
able excuse.
Offence of failing to produce document.
3. (1) A person commits an offence if, having been required to
produce a document to the Assessor in compliance with a require-ment under paragraph 1 , he or she fails to comply with the require-
ment and has not been excused by the Assessor.
(2) Subparagraph (1) does not apply if—
(a) the person does not have the document and cannot by any
reasonable effort obtain it; or
(b) the person could not be compelled to produce it in a court
of law.
Conduct of proceedings under this Schedule.
4. (1) The Assessor may require a person who appears before the
Assessor in compliance with a requirement made under paragraph 1
to swear an oath.
(2) The Assessor may administer an oath for the purposes of
this paragraph.
(3) The Assessor may permit a person giving oral evidence to be
cross-examined by a person nominated by the Assessor under suchprocedures as the Assessor may determine.
Proceedings normally to be in private.
5. (1) Except as provided by this paragraph, evidence to be given,
or a document to be produced, to the Assessor by a person whoappears before him or her in compliance with a requirement madeunder paragraph 1 is to be given or produced in private.
(2) If a person who appears before the Assessor in compliance
with a requirement made under paragraph 1 requests that the matter
be dealt with in public, the Assessor shall comply with the requestunless the matter raises issues that in the Assessor’s opinion shouldbe dealt with in private.
(3) If the Assessor is satisfied that it is desirable in the public
interest that the evidence to be given should be given, or the docu-ment to be produced should be produced, in public, the Assessormay direct accordingly.
(4) If the evidence is to be given, or the document is to be pro-
duced, in private, the Assessor may do either or both of thefollowing:
31Sch.Sch.
32[No. 1.] [2009.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
(a) give directions as to the persons (other than the Assessor
or the Assessor’s staff) who may be present during theproceeding;
(b) give directions preventing or restricting the publication of
the whole or any part of the evidence or of matters con-tained in the document.
(5) If the evidence is to be given, or the document is to be pro-
duced, in private, a person (other than the person required to appearbefore the Assessor, the Assessor or a member of the Assessor’sstaff) may be present only if entitled to be present because of a direc-tion given under subparagraph (4)(a) .
(6) A person who contravenes a direction of the Assessor under
subparagraph (4)(b) commits an offence.
Offence of refusing to be sworn or answer question.
6. (1) A person appearing before the Assessor in compliance with
a requirement made under paragraph 1 commits an offence if the
person—
(a) refuses or fails to swear an oath on being required to do
so by the Assessor, or
(b) refuses or fails to give evidence in compliance with a
requirement made under paragraph 1 ,o r
(c) refuses or fails to answer a question put to the person by
the Assessor or in cross-examination with the Assessor’spermission.
(2) Subparagraph (1) does not apply if the person has a reason-
able excuse.
(3) It is a reasonable excuse for the purposes of subparagraph (2)
for a person to refuse or fail to answer a question that the answermight tend to incriminate the person.
(4) Subparagraph (3) does not limit what is a reasonable excuse
for the purposes of subparagraph (2) .
Protection, etc., of persons appearing before Assessor.
7. Subject to this Schedule , a person who appears before the
Assessor in compliance with a requirement made under paragraph 1
has the same protection and privileges and is, in addition to theoffences under this Schedule , subject to the same liabilities as a wit-
ness in proceedings in the High Court.
Payment of allowances and expenses to persons who appear before
Assessor.
8. (1) A person who appears before the Assessor in compliance
with a requirement under paragraph 1 is entitled to be paid such
allowances and travelling or other expenses as are payable to or inrespect of a witness attending in civil proceedings before the HighCourt.
(2) All allowances and expenses payable under subparagraph (1)
are payable by the Assessor.[2009.] [ No. 1.] Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act
2009 .
Assessor’s certificate to Court of failure to produce document, etc.
9. (1) If a person refuses or fails—
(a) to produce to the Assessor a document in accordance with
a requirement by the Assessor,
(b) to attend before the Assessor when required so to do, or
(c) to answer a question put to him or her by the Assessor,
the Assessor may certify the refusal or failure to the Court.(2) The Court may, after hearing any witnesses who may be pro-
duced against or on behalf of the person alleged to have so refusedor failed and any statement which may be offered in defence, makeany order or give any direction it thinks fit.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subparagraph (2) , the
Court may—
(a) order the person concerned to attend or re-attend before
the Assessor, or to produce a particular document oranswer a particular question put to him or her by theAssessor, or
(b) order that the person concerned need not produce a part-
icular document, or answer a particular question put tohim or her by the Assessor.
33Sch.