————————
Number 23of2007
————————
HEALTH ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary Matters
Section
1. Short title, collective citation and construction.
2. Interpretation.3. Commencement.4. Establishment day.5. Expenses.
PART 2
Health Information and Quality Authority
6. Establishment of Health Information and Quality Authority.
7. Object of the Authority.
8. Functions of Authority.9. Investigations by Authority.
10. Standards set by Authority.11. Admissibility of standards in court proceedings.12. Provision of information to Authority.
PART 3
Board of the Authority
13. Membership of Board.
14. Role of Board.
15. Conditions of office.
12[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
16. Resignations and casual vacancies.
17. Removal of members from office.18. Meetings and procedures of Board.19. Committees of Board.20. Remuneration and expenses of members of Board and
committees.
PART 4
Chief Executive Officer of the Authority
21. Chief executive officer of Authority.
22. Functions of chief executive officer.23. Delegation of functions of chief executive officer.24. Accountability of chief executive officer to Committee of
Public Accounts.
25. Accountability of chief executive officer to other Oireachtas
Committees.
PART 5
Employees and Advisers
26. Employees of Authority.
27. Superannuation.28. Advisers.
PART 6
Accountability and Funding of Authority
29. Directions to Authority.
30. Corporate plan of Authority.31. Determination by Minister of net expenditure limits for
Authority.
32. Grants to Authority.33. Submission of business plan.34. Code of governance.35. Accounts of Authority.36. Gifts.37. Annual report.
38. Assistance to other bodies.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
39. Charges for services.
PART 7
Office of the Chief Inspector of Social Services
40. Office of Chief Inspector of Social Services.41. Functions of chief inspector.42. Accountability of chief inspector to Oireachtas Committees.43. Inspectors of Social Services.44. Plans and reports of Office of Chief Inspector.45. Arrangements with Executive.
PART 8
Regulation of Designated Centres
46. Prohibition against carrying on unregistered designated
centre.
47. Prohibition against false or misleading applications for
registration.
48. Applications for registration.49. Register of designated centres.50. Grant or refusal of registration.51. Cancelling registration, varying conditions of registration or
imposing new conditions, for cause.
52. Applications by registered providers.53. Notice of certain proposed decisions of chief inspector.54. Right to respond to notice of proposed decision.55. Notice of decisions of chief inspector.56. Required or prohibited conduct in relation to designated
centre.
57. Appeal to District Court from decision of chief inspector
respecting registration.
58. Chief inspector may seek District Court order enforcing cer-
tain decisions.
59. Chief inspector may seek District Court order for cancel-
lation or variation of registration.
60. Ex parte interim order in proceedings under section 59 .
61. Final determination of matters dealt with in an ex parte
interim order under section 59 .
62. Appeals to Circuit Court from decisions of District Court.
34[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
63. Status of chief inspector in court proceedings.
64. Care of residents on cancellation of registration.65. Submission of information.66. Prohibition against closure of designated centre without
notice.
67. Cancellation of registration on closure of designated centre.68. Notice of appointment under law to take charge of desig-
nated centre.
69. Transitional provision for registration of existing designated
centres.
PART 9
Inspections and Investigations
70. Appointment by the Authority of authorised persons.
71. Appointment by Executive of persons to examine desig-
nated centres.
72. Appointment of qualified persons to assist chief inspector
and inspectors in an inspection.
73. Right of entry and inspection by authorised person or chief
inspector.
74. Requirement for occupier’s consent or District Court war-
rant to enter dwelling.
75. Further circumstances in which District Court may issue
warrant.
76. Authorised person or chief inspector may be accompanied
by Garda.
77. Prohibition against certain conduct in relation to inspections
under section 73 .
78. Reports of authorised persons, the chief inspector and
inspectors.
PART 10
Offences
79. Offences.
80. Proceedings for offences.
PART 11
Standards, Disqualifications, etc.
81. Standards of integrity.
82. Codes of conduct.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
83. Availability of codes of conduct.
84. Prohibition against unauthorised disclosure of confidential
information.
85. Disqualification resulting from membership of either House
of Oireachtas or of European Parliament or localauthority.
PART 12
Dissolution of Specified Bodies, Transfer of Employees,
Property and Liabilities to the Authority
86. Specified bodies.87. Dissolution of specified bodies.88. Transfer of employees of specified bodies to Authority.89. Transfer of staff of Minister to Authority.90. Transfer of employees of Executive to Authority.91. Transfer of pension liabilities relating to former employees
of specified bodies.
92. Transfer of property and liabilities to Authority.93. Preservation of contracts, etc., and adaptation of references.94. Records of specified bodies.95. Pending legal proceedings.96. Final accounts of specified bodies.97. Final reports of specified bodies.
PART 13
Regulations
98. Regulations and orders.99. Regulations governing registration under this Act.
100. Regulations respecting procedures for setting standards.101. Regulations respecting designated centres.102. Laying of regulations and orders before Houses of
Oireachtas.
PART 14
Protection of Disclosures of Information
103. Protection of disclosures of information.
PART 15
Consequential and Minor Amendments to Other Acts
56[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
104. Repeals and revocations.
105. Amendment to other Acts.
SCHEDULE 1
Repeals and Revocations
PART 1
Acts Repealed
PART 2
Orders Revoked
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments to Other Acts
PART 1
Amendments to Child Care Act 1991
PART 2
Amendment to Comptroller and Auditor-General
(Amendment) Act 1993
PART 3
Amendments to Freedom of Information Act 1997
PART 4
Amendments to Health Act 2004
PART 5
Amendment to Civil Registration Act 2004
PART 6
Amendment to Disability Act 2005
PART 7
Amendment to Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006
————————[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005
Carer’s Leave Act 2001 2001, No. 19Central Bank Act 1942 1942, No. 22Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Act 2003 2003, No. 12
Child Care Act 1991 1991, No. 17Child Care Acts 1991 and 2001Children Act 2001 2001, No. 24Civil Registration Act 2004 2004, No. 3Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33Comptroller and Auditor General (Amendment) Act 1993 1993, No. 8Courts Act 1981 1981, No. 11Criminal Justice Act 2006 2006, No. 26Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 39 & 40 Vic., c. 77Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003Dentists Act 1985 1985, No. 9Disability Act 2005 2005, No. 14Education of Persons with Special Educational Needs Act
2004 2004, No. 30
Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 1995, No. 22European Parliament Elections Act 1997 1997, No. 2Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act 1998 1998, No. 29Freedom of Information Act 1997 1997, No. 13Freedom of Information Acts 1997 and 2003Harbours Act 1946 1946, No. 9Health Act 1947 1947, No. 28Health Act 2004 2004, No. 42Health Acts 1947 to 2006Health and Social Care Professionals Act 2005 2005, No. 27Health (Corporate Bodies) Act 1961 1961, No. 27Health Insurance Act 1994 1994, No. 16Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 1990, No. 23Health (Nursing Homes) (Amendment) Act 2007 2007, No. 1Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 2006, No. 17Hospitals Federation and Amalgamation Act 1961 1961, No. 21Local Government Act 2001 2001, No. 37Maternity Protection Act 1994 1994, No. 34Medical Practitioners Act 1978 1978, No. 4Mental Health Act 2001 2001, No. 25Mental Health Acts 1945 to 2001Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005
National Treasury Management Agency Act 1990 1990, No. 18National Treasury Management Agency (Amendment)
Act 2000 2000, No. 39
Nurses Act 1985 1985, No. 18Organisation of Working Time Act 1997 1997, No. 20Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 14 & 15 Vic., c. 93Pharmacy Act (Ireland) 1875 38 & 39 Vic., c. 57
78[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act 2003 2003, No. 29
Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001 2001, No. 45Protections for Persons Reporting Child Abuse Act 1998 1998, No. 49Public Health (Tobacco) Act 2002 2002, No. 6Public Service Management (Recruitment and
Appointments) Act 2004 2004, No. 33
Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003Standards in Public Office Act 2001 2001, No. 31Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005————————
Number 23of2007
————————
HEALTH ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A BODY TO BE KNOWN AS AN
tU´DARA ´S UM FHAISNE ´IS AGUS CA ´ILI´OCHT SLA ´INTE
OR, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, AS THE HEALTHINFORMATION AND QUALITY AUTHORITY ANDOIFIG AN PHRI ´OMH-CHIGIRE SEIRBHI ´SI´SO´ISIALA-
CHA OR, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, THE OFFICEOF THE CHIEF INSPECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES ANDTO PROVIDE FOR THE DISSOLUTION OF CERTAINBODIES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER OF THEFUNCTIONS OF THE DISSOLVED BODIES AND THEIREMPLOYEES TO THE HEALTH INFORMATION ANDQUALITY AUTHORITY; TO PROVIDE FOR A SCHEMEOF REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF RESIDEN-TIAL SERVICES FOR OLDER PEOPLE, PERSONS WITHDISABILITIES AND CHILDREN IN NEED OF CAREAND PROTECTION; TO PROVIDE FOR THE REPEALAND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN OTHER ACTS; ANDTO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[21st April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary Matters
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Health Act 2007.
(2) The Health Acts 1947 to 2006, this Act and the Health
(Nursing Homes) (Amendment) Act 2007 may be cited together asthe Health Acts 1947 to 2007 and shall be construed together asone.
2.—(1) In this Act:
“Authority” means the Health Information and Quality Authority
established under section 6 ;
“Board” means the Board, referred to in section 13 , of the Authority;
9Short title,
collective citationand construction.
Interpretation.Pt.1S . 2
10[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
“dependent person” means dependent person as defined in section
1(1) of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990;
“designated centre” means an institution—
(a) at which residential services are provided by the Execu-
tive, a service provider or a person that is not a serviceprovider but who receives assistance under section 39 ofthe Health Act 2004 or under section 10 of the Child CareAct 1991—
(i) in accordance with the Child Care Act 1991,
(ii) to persons with disabilities, in relation to their dis-
abilities, or
(iii) to other dependent persons, in relation to their
dependencies,
or
(b) that is a nursing home as defined in section 2 of the Health
(Nursing Homes) Act 1990,
but does not include any of the following:
(i) a centre registered by the Mental Health Commission;
(ii) an institution managed by or on behalf of a Minister of
the Government;
(iii) that part of an institution in which the majority of persons
being cared for and maintained are being treated foracute illness or provided with palliative care;
(iv) an institution primarily used for the provision of edu-
cational, cultural, recreational, leisure, social or physicalactivities;
(v) a special care unit;
(vi) a children detention school as defined in section 3 of the
Children Act 2001;
“disability” means disability as defined in section 2 of the Disability
Act 2005 and the term “substantial restriction” in that definition shallbe construed as meaning a restriction as described in paragraphs ( a)
and ( b) of section 7(2) of that Act;
“Executive” means the Health Service Executive established under
the Health Act 2004;
“financial year” means a period of 12 months ending on 31
December in any year;
“Interim Health Information and Quality Authority” means the
body established by the Interim Health Information and QualityAuthority (Establishment) Order, 2005 (S.I. No. 132 of 2005);
“Irish Health Services Accreditation Board” means the body estab-
lished by the Irish Health Services Accreditation Board(Establishment) Order, 2002 (S.I. No. 160 of 2002);[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
“local authority” has the same meaning as in the Local Government
Act 2001;
“Mental Health Commission” means the body established by section
32 of the Mental Health Act 2001;
“member” in relation to the Board includes the chairperson;“Minister” means the Minister for Health and Children;“ordinary member” means a member of the Board other than the
chairperson;
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulation made by the Minister;“public authority” means any of the following:
(a) a Minister of the Government;
(b) the Commissioners of Public Works in Ireland;
(c) a local authority;
(d) a harbour authority within the meaning of the Harbours
Act 1946;
(e) a board or other body (but not a company) established by
or under statute;
(f) a company in which all the shares are held by or on behalf
of, or by directors appointed by, a Minister of theGovernment;
(g) a company in which all the shares are held by a board,
company or other body referred to in paragraph (e) or
(f);
(h) any other body prescribed for the purpose of any provision
of this Act;
“register” means a register of designated centres established under
section 41(b) ;
“registered provider” in relation to a designated centre means the
person whose name is entered in a register as the person carrying onthe business of the designated centre;
“service provider” means a person who—
(a) enters into an arrangement under section 38 of the Health
Act 2004 to provide a health or personal social service onbehalf of the Executive, or
(b) is in receipt of assistance under—
(i) section 39 of the Health Act 2004 in an amount that
exceeds an amount prescribed for the purpose of thissubparagraph, or
(ii) section 10 of the Child Care Act 1991 in an amount
that exceeds an amount prescribed for the purposeof this subparagraph;
11Pt.1S . 2Pt.1S . 2
Commencement.
Establishment day.
Expenses.
Establishment of
Health Informationand QualityAuthority.
12[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
“special care unit” means a special care unit provided and main-
tained in accordance with section 23K of the Child Care Act 1991,by or on behalf of the Executive;
“superannuation benefit” means a pension, gratuity or other allow-
ance payable on resignation, retirement or death.
(2) For the purposes of the definition of designated centre in sub-
section (1) , “institution” means a home, centre or institution or part
of a home, centre or institution.
3.—(1) This Act comes into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order.
(2) Different days may be appointed under this section for differ-
ent purposes or different provisions of this Act.
4.—The Minister shall, by order, appoint a day to be the establish-
ment day for the purposes of this Act.
5.—The expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration
of this Act shall, to such extent as may be sanctioned by the Ministerfor Finance, be paid out of money provided by the Oireachtas.
PART 2
Health Information and Quality Authority
6.—(1) There is hereby established a body, to be known as An
tU´dara´s um Fhaisne ´is agus Ca ´ilı´ocht Sla ´inte or in the English langu-
age as the Health Information and Quality Authority to perform thefunctions assigned to it by this Act.
(2) The Authority is a body corporate with perpetual succession.(3) The Authority may sue and be sued in its corporate name and,
with the consent of the Minister and the Minister for Finance, mayacquire, hold and dispose of land or an interest in land and anyother property.
(4) The Authority shall provide itself with a seal as soon as may
be after the Authority’s establishment.
(5) The seal of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signa-
ture of—
(a) the chairperson of the Authority or of another member of
the Board of the Authority authorised by it to act in thatbehalf, and
(b) by the signature of the chief executive officer or of another
member of staff of the Authority as may be designatedby the chief executive officer.
(6) Judicial notice shall be taken of the seal of the Authority, and
any document purporting to be an instrument made by the Authority[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
and to be sealed with the seal of the Authority shall, unless the con-
trary is shown, be received in evidence and be deemed to be thatinstrument without further proof.
7.—The object of the Authority is to promote safety and quality
in the provision of health and personal social services for the benefitof the health and welfare of the public.
8.—(1) The functions of the Authority are as follows:
(a) subject to this Act and to the extent practicable, to further
the Authority’s object;
(b) to set standards on safety and quality in relation to—
(i) services provided by the Executive or a service pro-
vider in accordance with—
(I) the Health Acts 1947 to 2007, except for services
under the Mental Health Acts 1945 to 2001 that,under the Health Act 2004, are provided bythe Executive,
(II) the Child Care Acts 1991 and 2001,
(III) the Children Act 2001,
and
(ii) services provided by a nursing home as defined in
section 2 of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990,
in this section called the “services”, and advise the Mini-
ster and the Executive accordingly;
(c) to monitor compliance with the standards referred to in
paragraph (b) , except any standards in relation to desig-
nated centres, special care units and the performance ofthe Executive’s functions referred to in section 41(a) and
to advise the Minister and the Executive accordingly;
(d) to undertake investigations in accordance with section 9 ;
(e) at the request or with the approval of the Minister to
review and make recommendations as the Authoritythinks fit in respect of the services, to ensure the bestoutcomes for the resources available to the Executive;
(f) to operate accreditation programmes in respect of the
services and to grant accreditation to any of them meet-ing standards set or recognised by the Authority;
(g) to operate such other schemes aimed at ensuring safety
and quality in the provision of the services as the Auth-ority considers appropriate;
(h) to evaluate the clinical and cost effectiveness of health
technologies including drugs and provide advice arisingout of the evaluation to the Minister and the Executive;
13Pt.2S . 6
Object of the
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.Pt.2S . 8
Investigations by
Authority.
14[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(i) to evaluate available information respecting the services
and the health and welfare of the population;
(j) to provide advice and make recommendations to the Mini-
ster and the Executive about deficiencies identified bythe Authority in respect of the information referred to inparagraph (i) ;
(k) to set standards as the Authority considers appropriate for
the Executive and service providers respecting data andinformation in their possession in relation to services andthe health and welfare of the population;
(l) to advise the Minister and the Executive as to the level of
compliance by the Executive and service providers withthe standards referred to in paragraph (k) ;
(m) to act as a body standing prescribed by regulations made
by the Minister for Health and Children—
(i) as set out in section 5(5) of the Education for Persons
with Special Educational Needs Act 2004, and
(ii) as set out in section 10 of the Disability Act 2005.
(2) In carrying out its functions the Authority shall have regard
to—
(a) the policies and objectives of the Government or any Mini-
ster of the Government in so far as they may affect orrelate to the functions of the Authority,
(b) the need to co-operate with and co-ordinate its activities
with public authorities, the performance of whose func-tions may affect or relate to the functions of the Auth-ority other than the functions described in subsection
(1)(c) ,(d)and (l),
(c) the resources available to the Executive, and
(d) in so far as is reasonably practicable, research, statistics
and other information in relation to the health and per-sonal social services that are provided in other juris-dictions.
(3) The Authority has all the powers as are necessary or expedi-
ent for the performance by it of its functions.
(4) Subject to any directions given by the Minister under section
29, or to any charges determined under section 39 , the Authority, in
relation to health or personal social services, may—
(a) provide advice on safety, quality and standards, and
(b) operate accreditation programmes for and at the request
of health providers other than service providers asdefined in section 2(1) or the Executive.
9.—(1) The Authority may undertake an investigation as to the
safety, quality and standards of the services described in section
8(1)(b) if the Authority believes on reasonable grounds that—[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) there is a serious risk to the health or welfare of a person
receiving those services, and
(b) the risk may be the result of any act, failure to act or negli-
gence on the part of—
(i) the Executive,
(ii) a service provider,
(iii) the registered provider of a designated centre, or
(iv) the person in charge of a designated centre if other
than its registered provider.
(2) The Minister may, if he or she believes on reasonable
grounds that—
(a) there is a serious risk of the kind mentioned in paragraph
(a)ofsubsection (1) , and
(b) the risk may be the result of any act, failure or negligence
of the kind mentioned in paragraph (b) of that
subsection,
require the Authority to undertake an investigation in accordance
with this section.
(3) The Authority must ensure that an investigation under this
section does not interfere, or conflict, with the functions of otherstatutory bodies.
10.—(1) In this section, “standards” means standards set by the
Authority under section 8(1) .
(2) After considering any representations made in relation to any
standards proposed by the Authority and after making any changesthe Authority thinks fit, it shall submit the proposed standards to theMinister for approval.
11.—(1) In proceedings for an offence under this Act relating to
an alleged contravention of any provision of this Act or of the regu-lations in respect of which standards have been set by the Authorityunder section 8(1)(b) ,subsection (2) of this section has effect in
relation to those standards and those proceedings.
(2) Where the standards referred to in subsection (1) appear to
the Court to give guidance as to the observance of the provision ofthe Act or of the regulations that is alleged to have been contra-vened, the standards are admissible in evidence.
(3) If it is proved that any act or omission of the defendant,
alleged to constitute a contravention of a provision referred to insubsection (1) ,i s —
(a) in compliance with the standards referred to in subsection
(1),o r
(b) not in compliance with those standards,
15Pt.2S . 9
Standards set by
Authority.
Admissibility of
standards in courtproceedings.Pt.2 S.11
Provision of
information toAuthority.
Membership of
Board.
16[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
the fact of that compliance or non-compliance is admissible in
evidence.
(4) A document bearing the seal of the Authority and purporting
to be a standard or part of a standard set by the Authority undersection 8(1)(b) is admissible as evidence in any proceedings under
this Act.
12.—The Authority may require the Executive or a service pro-
vider to provide it with any information or statistics the Authorityneeds in order to determine the level of compliance by the Executiveor by the service provider with the standards set by the Authority inaccordance with section 8(1) .
PART 3
Board of the Authority
13.—(1) The Authority shall have a Board consisting of 12
members (including the chairperson and 11 ordinary members)appointed by the Minister in accordance with this section.
(2) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Minister
from among persons, who in the opinion of the Minister, have experi-ence and expertise in relation to matters connected with the func-tions of the Authority which would enable such a person to makea substantial contribution to the performance by the Authority ofits functions.
(3) A person is not eligible for appointment as a member of the
Board or a committee of the Board, if the person is—
(a) a member of either House of the Oireachtas or of the
European Parliament,
(b) regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European Parlia-
ment Elections Act 1997, as having been elected to theEuropean Parliament to fill a vacancy, or
(c) a member of a local authority.
(4) The chairperson of the Board holds office for a period not
exceeding 5 years from the date of his or her appointment, as theMinister shall determine.
(5) Subject to subsection (6) , an ordinary member of the Board
shall hold office for a period not exceeding 5 years from the date ofhis or her appointment, as the Minister shall determine.
(6) Of the ordinary members of the Board first constituted under
this section—
(a) 6 members of the Board as shall at a meeting held for the
purposes of this subsection be selected—
(i) by unanimous agreement of the members of the
Board attending the meeting, or[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(ii) where no such agreement can for whatever reason be
reached, by the drawing of lots by the members ofthe Board so attending,
shall hold office for a period of 3 years, and
(b) the remaining 5 members shall hold office for a period of
5 years.
(7) Subject to subsection (8) , a member of the Board whose term
of office expires by the passage of time is eligible for reappointmentto the Board.
(8) A member of the Board who has served 2 terms of office is
not eligible for reappointment to the Board, and any period duringwhich a person serves as a member of the Board pursuant to anappointment under section 16 shall be deemed for the purposes of
this subsection to be a term of office.
(9) The Minister shall endeavour to ensure that among the
members of the Board there is an equitable balance between menand women.
14.—(1) The Board is the governing body of the Authority with
authority, in the name of the Authority, to perform the functions ofthe Authority.
(2) The Board may delegate any of its functions to the chief
executive officer.
(3) If a function of the Authority is delegated to the chief execu-
tive officer under subsection (2) , the delegation remains in force until
the Board revokes the delegation.
15.—(1) The Minister at any time may remove a member of the
Board from office if, in the Minister’s opinion—
(a) the member has become incapable through ill-health of
performing the functions of the office,
(b) the member has committed stated misbehaviour,
(c) the member’s removal from office appears to be necessary
for the Board to perform its functions in an effectivemanner,
(d) the member has contravened section 81(1) or84(2) of this
Act or a provision of the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995that by a regulation made under section 3 of that Actapplies to that member, or
(e) in performing functions under this Act, the member has
not complied with—
(i) a code of conduct, under section 10(3) of the Stan-
dards in Public Office Act 2001, or
(ii) the code of governance under section 34 that relates
to the Board member.
17Pt.3 S.13
Role of Board.
Conditions of
office.Pt.3 S.15
Resignations and
casual vacancies.
Removal of
members fromoffice.
18[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(2) A member of the Board ceases to hold office if the member—
(a) is adjudicated bankrupt,
(b) makes a composition or arrangement with creditors,
(c) is convicted of an indictable offence,
(d) is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty,
(e) is the subject of an order under section 160 of the Com-
panies Act 1990,
(f) is sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a court of com-
petent jurisdiction, or
(g) is removed by a competent authority for any reason (other
than failure to pay a fee) from any register establishedfor the purpose of registering members of a profession.
(3) A member of the Board who does not, for a consecutive
period of 6 months, attend a meeting of the Board ceases at the endof that period to hold office unless the member demonstrates to theMinister’s satisfaction that the non-attendance was due to illness.
16.—(1) A member of the Board may resign by letter to the Mini-
ster and the resignation takes effect on the later of—
(a) the date specified in the letter, and
(b) the receipt of the letter by the Minister.
(2) If a member of the Board dies, resigns, ceases to be qualified
for office, ceases to hold office or is removed from office, the Mini-ster may appoint a person to fill the casual vacancy so occasioned.
(3) A person appointed to be a member of the Board under this
section—
(a) holds office for that period of the term of office of the
member who occasioned the casual vacancy concernedthat remains unexpired at the date of the appointment,and
(b) subject to section 13(8) , is eligible for reappointment as a
member of the Board on the expiry of that period.
17.—(1) The Minister may remove all the members of the Board
from office if the Board—
(a) does not achieve a quorum for 3 consecutive meetings,
(b) does not comply with a judgment, order or decree of any
court,
(c) does not comply with a direction of the Minister or any
other requirement imposed on it by or under any enact-ment including this Act, or[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(d) in the Minister’s opinion, is not performing its functions in
an effective manner.
(2) If, in the Minister’s opinion, the Board is not performing its
functions in an effective manner, the Minister may appoint a per-son to—
(a) conduct an independent review of any matter giving rise
to that opinion, and
(b) submit a report to the Minister on the results of the
review.
(3) The Board shall co-operate with any such review and give the
person conducting it all reasonable assistance, including access topremises, equipment and records as the person may require for thepurposes of the review.
(4) The removal of all the members of the Board does not revoke
or otherwise affect any delegation of the Board’s functions to thechief executive officer under section 14(2) .
18.—(1) The Minister, in consultation with the chairperson of the
Board, shall fix the date of the first meeting of the Board first consti-tuted pursuant to section 13 and shall specify the time and place at
which the meeting shall take place.
(2) The Board shall hold such meetings as are necessary for the
performance of its functions but in each year shall meet at least onceevery 2 months.
(3) At a meeting of the Board—
(a) the chairperson of the Board, if present, shall be the chair-
person of the meeting, or
(b) if and so long as the chairperson of the Board is not
present, or if that office is vacant, the members of theBoard who are present shall choose one of their numberto be chairperson of the meeting.
(4) Every question at a meeting shall be determined by a majority
of the votes of the members of the Board present and voting on thequestion and, in the case of an equal division of votes, the chair-person of the meeting shall have a second or casting vote.
(5) Subject to subsection (8) , the Board may act notwithstanding
one or more vacancies among its members.
(6) Subject to this Act, the Board shall regulate, by standing
orders, the procedures and business of the Board.
(7) Notwithstanding subsection (6) , non-compliance with the
standing orders of the Board does not invalidate any decision ofthe Board.
(8) The quorum for a meeting of the Board is 5 unless the Mini-
ster otherwise directs.
(9) The chairperson may call a meeting of the Board at any
reasonable time.
19Pt.3 S.17
Meetings and
procedures ofBoard.Pt.3 S.18
Committees of
Board.
Remuneration and
expenses ofmembers of Boardand committees.
20[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(10) If the chairperson refuses to call a meeting of the Board, after
a requisition for that purpose, signed by not less than 3 members ofthe Board has been presented to the chairperson, any 3 members ofthe Board may call a meeting of the Board.
(11) If the chairperson, without refusing to do so, does not, within
7 days after the presentation of a requisition for that purpose signedby not less than 3 members of the Board, call a meeting of the Board,any 3 members of the Board may call a meeting of the Board.
19.—(1) The Board may—
(a) establish committees to provide assistance and advice to
the Board in relation to the performance of its func-tions, and
(b) determine the membership and terms of reference of
each committee.
(2) The Board may appoint persons to a committee who are not
members of the Board but have special knowledge and experiencerelated to the purpose of the committee.
(3) The appointment of a person to a committee is subject to the
terms and conditions as may be determined—
(a) under section 20 , to the extent that the terms and con-
ditions relate to remuneration and allowances forexpenses, and
(b) by the Board in any other case.
(4) The Board shall specify in writing the purpose and terms of
reference of each committee.
(5) The acts of a committee are subject to confirmation by the
Board, unless the Board dispenses with the necessity for con-firmation.
(6) The Board may regulate the procedure of a committee but,
subject to any such regulation, a committee may regulate its ownprocedure.
(7) The Board may at any time dissolve a committee established
under this section.
20.—(1) The remuneration and allowances for expenses, if any,
determined in accordance with subsection (3) are payable by the
Authority out of funds at its disposal to—
(a) the members of the Board, and
(b) the members of a committee of the Board.
(2) The remuneration and allowances for expenses, if any, deter-
mined in accordance with subsection (3) are payable by the Minister
out of money provided by the Oireachtas to a person appointed
under section 17(2) to conduct an independent review.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(3) With the consent of the Minister for Finance, the Minister
may determine the remuneration and allowances for expenses pay-able under this section.
PART 4
Chief Executive Officer of the Authority
21.—(1) The Board shall appoint a person recruited in accordance
with the Public Service Management (Recruitment andAppointments) Act 2004 to be the chief executive officer of theAuthority.
(2) A person is not eligible for appointment as the chief executive
officer if the person is—
(a) a member of either House of the Oireachtas or of the
European Parliament,
(b) regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European Parlia-
ment Elections Act 1997, as having been elected to theEuropean Parliament to fill a vacancy, or
(c) a member of a local authority.
(3) The chief executive officer shall hold office on the terms and
conditions (including those relating to remuneration, allowances andsuperannuation) that shall be determined by the Board with theapproval of the Minister given with the consent of the Minister forFinance.
(4) The chief executive officer shall be paid by the Authority, out
of funds at its disposal, remuneration and allowances determinedunder subsection (3) .
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (1) , the chief executive officer of
the Interim Health Information and Quality Authority is the firstchief executive officer of the Authority and shall hold office subjectto the terms and conditions as may be determined in accordance withsubsection (3) .
22.—(1) The chief executive officer shall—
(a) carry on, and manage and control generally, the admini-
stration and business of the Authority,
(b) perform such other functions as may be assigned to that
officer by or under this Act or another enactment or asmay be delegated to him or her by the Board, and
(c) supply the Board with information (including financial
information) relating to the performance of the chiefexecutive officer’s functions as the Board may require.
(2) The chief executive officer is responsible to the Board for the
performance of the chief executive officer’s functions and the imple-mentation of the Board’s policies.
(3) If the chief executive officer is absent or the position of chief
executive officer is vacant, the functions of the chief executive officer
21Pt.3 S.20
Chief executive
officer of Authority.
Functions of chief
executive officer.Pt.4 S.22
Delegation of
functions of chiefexecutive officer.
Accountability of
chief executiveofficer toCommittee ofPublic Accounts.
22[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
under this section may be performed by an employee of the Auth-
ority designated by the Authority.
23.—(1) Subject to any directions that may be given by the Board,
the chief executive officer may—
(a) delegate any of the chief executive officer’s functions
under section 22 (including those relating to financial
matters) to employees of the Authority specified byname, position or otherwise, and
(b) authorise the subdelegation of any or all delegated func-
tions to or by other such employees.
(2) Any function delegated or subdelegated under this section to
an employee is to be performed by the employee under the generaldirection and control of the chief executive officer and in compliancewith directions, limitations and guidelines as may be specified by—
(a) in the case of a delegated function, the chief executive
officer, or
(b) in the case of a subdelegated function, the employee who
subdelegated that function.
(3) The delegation or subdelegation of a function does not pre-
clude the person who for the time being holds the position of chiefexecutive officer from performing the function.
(4) The chief executive officer may—
(a) vary any delegation or subdelegation of a function under
this section,
(b) revoke such delegation or subdelegation, or
(c) without revoking the delegation, revoke any subdelegation
of the function.
(5) On varying or revoking the delegation or subdelegation of a
function, the chief executive officer shall inform each employee towhom the function was delegated or subdelegated of its variationor revocation.
(6) An employee of the Authority who subdelegates a function
delegated or subdelegated to the employee under this section—
(a) may vary or revoke the subdelegation, and
(b) is not precluded from performing the function.
(7) On varying or revoking the subdelegation of a function, the
employee who subdelegated the function shall inform each employeeto whom the function was subdelegated of its variation or revocation.
24.—(1) The chief executive officer, whenever required in writing
to do so by the Committee of Da ´il E´ireann established under the
Standing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann to examine and report to Da ´il
E´ireann on the appropriation accounts and reports of the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor General, shall give evidence to that Committee on—[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) the regularity and propriety of the transactions recorded
or required to be recorded in any book or other record ofaccount subject to audit by the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral that the Authority is required by this Act toprepare,
(b) the economy and efficiency of the Authority in the use of
its resources,
(c) the systems, procedures and practices employed by the
Authority for the purpose of evaluating the effectivenessof its operations, and
(d) any matter affecting the Authority referred to in a special
report of the Comptroller and Auditor General undersection 11(2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General(Amendment) Act 1993 or in any other report of theComptroller and Auditor General, in so far as it relatesto a matter specified in paragraph (a) ,(b)or(c), that is
laid before Da ´il E´ireann.
(2) In the performance of the duties of the chief executive officer
under this section, the chief executive officer shall not question orexpress an opinion on the merits of any policy of the Governmentor a Minister of the Government or on the merits of the objectivesof such a policy.
25.—(1) In this section “Committee” means a Committee
appointed by either House of the Oireachtas or jointly by bothHouses of the Oireachtas (other than the Committee referred to insection 24 or the Committee on Members’ Interests of Da ´il E´ireann
or the Committee on Members’ Interests of Seanad E ´ireann) or a
subcommittee of such a Committee.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the chief executive officer, at the
request in writing of a Committee, shall attend before the Committeeto give an account of the general administration of the Authority.
(3) The chief executive officer shall not be required to give an
account before a Committee of any matter which is or has been ormay at a future time be the subject of proceedings before a court ortribunal in the State.
(4) Where the chief executive officer is of the opinion that a
matter in respect of which he or she is requested to give an accountbefore a Committee is a matter to which subsection (3) applies, he
or she shall inform the Committee of that opinion and the reasonsfor the opinion and, unless the information is conveyed to the Com-mittee at a time when the chief executive officer is before it, theinformation shall be so conveyed in writing.
(5) Where the chief executive officer has informed a Committee
of the chief executive officer’s opinion in accordance with subsection
(4)and the Committee does not withdraw the request referred to
insubsection (2) in so far as it relates to a matter the subject of
that opinion—
(a) the chief executive officer, not later than 21 days after
being informed by the Committee of its decision not towithdraw the request, may apply to the High Court in asummary manner for determination of the question
23Pt.4 S.24
Accountability of
chief executiveofficer to otherOireachtasCommittees.Pt.4 S.25
Employees of
Authority.
24[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
whether the matter is one to which subsection (3)
applies, or
(b) the chairperson of the Committee, on behalf of the Com-
mittee, may make such an application,
and the High Court shall determine the matter.
(6) Pending the determination of an application under subsection
(5), the chief executive officer shall not attend before the Committee
to give an account of the matter to which the application relates.
(7) If the High Court determines that the matter concerned is one
to which subsection (3) applies, the Committee shall withdraw the
request referred to in subsection (2) , but if the High Court deter-
mines that subsection (3) does not apply, the chief executive officer
shall attend before the Committee to give an account of the matter.
(8) In the performance of the chief executive officer’s duties
under this section, the chief executive officer shall not question orexpress an opinion on the merits of any policy of the Governmentor a Minister of the Government or on the merits of the objectivesof such a policy.
PART 5
Employees and Advisers
26.—(1) The Authority, subject to subsection (2) and (4), may
appoint persons to be its employees and may determine their duties.
(2) Employees appointed under this section shall be recruited in
accordance with the Public Service Management (Recruitment andAppointments) Act 2004.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to employees appointed under
this section during the 3 months beginning on the establishment dayor during a shorter period that the Minister may specify.
(4) The Authority, with the approval of the Minister given with
the consent of the Minister for Finance, shall determine—
(a) the terms and conditions of employment (including terms
and conditions relating to remuneration and allowances)of employees appointed under this section, and
(b) the grades of the employees of the Authority and the
numbers of employees in each grade.
(5) A person is not eligible for appointment as an employee of
the Authority if the person is—
(a) a member of either House of the Oireachtas or of the
European Parliament, or
(b) regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European Parlia-
ment Elections Act 1997, as having been elected to theEuropean Parliament to fill a vacancy.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(6) The remuneration and allowances of the Authority’s
employees are payable by the Authority to the employees out offunds at the Authority’s disposal.
27.—(1) The Authority shall prepare and submit to the Minister
a scheme or schemes for the granting of superannuation benefits toor in respect of such employees of the Authority as it may think fit.
(2) Every such scheme shall fix the time and conditions of retire-
ment for all persons to or in respect of whom superannuationbenefits are payable under the scheme, and different terms may befixed in respect of different classes of persons.
(3) Every such scheme may be amended or revoked by a sub-
sequent scheme prepared, submitted and approved under thissection.
(4) A scheme submitted by the Authority under this section, if
approved by the Minister with the consent of the Minister for Fin-ance, shall be carried out by the Authority in accordance with theterms of the scheme.
(5) No superannuation benefit shall be granted by the Authority
nor shall any other arrangements be entered into by the Authorityfor the provision of such a benefit, to or in respect of an employeeotherwise than in accordance with a scheme under this section orwith the consent of the Minister and the Minister for Finance.
(6) Each scheme made under this section shall make provision
for appeals.
(7) The terms and conditions governing superannuation benefits
granted under schemes made under this section to persons whotransferred to the Authority under sections 88 to90shall be no less
favourable than those terms and conditions to which they wereentitled immediately before their transfer.
(8) Where, in the period beginning on the establishment day and
ending immediately before the commencement of a scheme underthis section, a superannuation benefit falls due for payment to or inrespect of a person who was transferred to the Authority undersections 88 to90—
(a) the benefit shall be calculated by the Authority in accord-
ance with such scheme, or such enactments in relationto superannuation, as applied to the person immediatelybefore the transfer, and
(b) the person’s pensionable service with the Authority shall
be aggregated with the person’s previous pensionableservice and the benefit, as so calculated, shall be paid bythe Authority.
(9) A scheme under this section shall be laid before each House
of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if a resol-ution annulling the scheme is passed by either such House within thenext 21 days on which that House has sat after the scheme is laidbefore it, the scheme shall be annulled accordingly, but withoutprejudice to anything done previously.
25Pt.5 S.26
Superannuation.Pt.5
Advisers.
Directions to
Authority.
Corporate plan of
Authority.
26[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
28.—(1) The Authority, with the approval of the Minister given
with the consent of the Minister for Finance, may engage suchadvisers as it considers necessary for the performance of its functions.
(2) Any fees due to an adviser engaged under this section are
payable by the Authority out of funds at the Authority’s disposal.
PART 6
Accountability and Funding of Authority
29.—(1) The Minister may give general directions in writing to
the Authority for any purpose in relation to the provisions of thisAct, or any other enactment, and for any matter or thing referred toin this Act, as specified or to be specified, or as determined or to bedetermined, and the Authority shall comply with any such direction.
(2) The Minister may direct the Authority or the chief inspector
to supply the Minister with information, reports or statistics, in themanner and within the period, both as the Minister may determine,in relation to the performance of the functions assigned by or underthis Act to the Authority or to the chief inspector.
(3) The Authority or the chief inspector, as specified in the Mini-
ster’s direction, shall comply with the Minister’s direction.
30.—(1) The Authority shall prepare, adopt and at the times
specified in subsection (2) , submit to the Minister for approval a cor-
porate plan for the 3 year period following the date of its submission.
(2) A corporate plan must be submitted at the following times:
(a) within 6 months after the establishment day;
(b) within 6 months after the appointment of a new Minister
if that Minister requests that a new corporate plan besubmitted;
(c) at the end of the 3 year period since the last corporate
plan was submitted.
(3) The corporate plan must be prepared in a form and manner
in accordance with any direction given by the Minister and mustspecify—
(a) the key objectives of the Authority and the Office of the
Chief Inspector of Social Services for the 3 year periodconcerned and the strategies for achieving those objec-tives, and
(b) the uses to which the Authority proposes to apply its
resources.
(4) In preparing the corporate plan, the Authority shall have
regard to the policies of the Government or a Minister of theGovernment to the extent that those policies may affect or relate tothe functions of the Authority.
(5) Within 3 months after receiving a corporate plan, the Mini-
ster shall—[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) approve the plan, or
(b) refuse to approve the plan if the plan is not amended in
accordance with any directions that may be given by theMinister to the Authority.
(6) An approved corporate plan may be amended by the Minister
at any time or may be amended by the Authority, but in the lattercase only after—
(a) the Authority submits the proposed amendment to the
Minister for approval, and
(b) the amendment is approved by the Minister.
(7) Subsections (3) to(5)apply with the necessary modifications
in respect of an amendment by the Authority to an approved corpor-ate plan.
(8) Nothing in a corporate plan is to be taken to prevent the
Authority from, or to limit the Authority in, performing its functions.
(9) The Minister shall ensure that a copy of an approved corpor-
ate plan is laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas—
(a) within 21 days after the plan is approved by the Minister,
and
(b) if the plan is amended under subsection (6) after being
approved by the Minister, within 21 days after—
(i) in the case of an amendment made by the Minister,
the making of the amendment, or
(ii) in the case of an amendment made by the Authority,
the approval of the amendment by the Minister.
(10) The Authority shall ensure that, as soon as practicable after
copies of an approved plan are laid before the Houses of theOireachtas, the plan is published on the Internet and in accordancewith such other arrangements as the Minister may specify.
(11) The Authority shall provide the Minister with a progress
report on the implementation of an approved corporate plan for theAuthority in the Authority’s annual report and, at the request of theMinister, at other times that the Minister may specify.
31.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Minister, for a financial
year of the Authority, shall—
(a) determine the maximum amount of net expenditure that
may be incurred by the Authority for that financialyear, and
(b) notify the Authority in writing of the amount so deter-
mined not more than 21 days after the publication by theGovernment of the Estimates for Supply Services for thatfinancial year.
(2) If the Minister considers it appropriate in any particular case,
a determination under this section may relate to the period (other
27Pt.6 S.30
Determination by
Minister of netexpenditure limitsfor Authority.Pt.6 S.31
Grants to
Authority.
Submission of
business plan.
Code of
governance.
28[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
than the financial year of the Authority) as the Minister may specify
in the relevant notification under this section.
(3) The Minister may amend a determination under subsection (1)
by varying the maximum amount of net expenditure that the Auth-ority may incur for a particular financial year and, if the Ministervaries that amount, the Minister shall notify the Authority in writingof the amendment as soon as may be and the determination appliesand has effect as so amended.
32.—The Minister may, with the consent of the Minister for Fin-
ance, advance to the Authority out of money provided by theOireachtas such sum as the Minister may determine.
33.—(1) Within 30 days after having been notified of its determi-
nation under section 31 for a financial year, the Authority shall sub-
mit to the Minister a business plan for the year.
(2) A business plan must be prepared in the form and manner and
in accordance with any directions given by the Minister and must—
(a) indicate the Authority’s activities for the period to which
the business plan relates,
(b) contain estimates of the number of employees of the
Authority for the period to which the plan relates,
(c) contain the business plan for the Office of the Chief
Inspector of Social Services,
(d) contain any other information specified by the Minister,
(e) accord with policies and objectives of the Minister and the
Government, and
(f) be consistent with the financial limits determined by the
Minister under section 31 .
(3) In preparing the business plan, the Authority shall have
regard to—
(a) the approved corporate plan in operation at that time, and
(b) any direction given by the Minister under section 29 .
(4) The Authority shall give effect to the business plan unless the
Minister, within 30 days after the submission of the plan, directs theAuthority in writing to either amend the plan or not to give effectto it.
(5) The Minister shall, when giving a direction to the Authority
under subsection (4) , at the same time give to the Authority the Mini-
ster’s written reasons for the direction.
(6) The Authority shall comply with a direction under subsection
(4).
34.—(1) As soon as practicable after the Authority is established,
it shall submit to the Minister for approval a code of governance thatincludes an outline of the—[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) guiding principles applicable to the Authority as a public
body having the functions described in section 8 ,
(b) structure of the Authority, including the role and
responsibilities of the Board, the chief executive officerand the chief inspector,
(c) processes and guidelines to be followed to ensure com-
pliance with the reporting requirements imposed on theAuthority by or under this Act, and
(d) the Authority’s internal controls, including its procedures
relating to internal audit, risk management, public pro-curement and financial reporting.
(2) The Authority shall review the code of governance period-
ically at the times that may be specified by the Minister and shallrevise the code as the Authority considers appropriate.
(3) In preparing or making revisions to the code of governance,
the Authority shall have regard to any direction given by the Mini-ster under section 29 .
(4) Following the Minister’s approval of the code of governance
or of any revisions to it, the Authority shall arrange for the publi-cation of the code or the revised code.
(5) The Authority shall indicate in its annual report its arrange-
ments for implementing and maintaining adherence to the code ofgovernance.
35.—(1) The Authority shall cause to be kept all proper and usual
books or other records of account of—
(a) all income and expenditure of the Authority,
(b) the source of the income and the subject matter of the
expenditure, and
(c) the property, assets and liabilities of the Authority.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1) , the Authority shall also keep
any special accounts as the Minister may direct.
(3) The books, records and special accounts kept under this
section shall be—
(a) kept in the form, and
(b) for the accounting periods,
as the Minister may specify, with the consent of the Minister for
Finance.
(4) The accounts of the Authority approved by the Board shall
be submitted to the Comptroller and Auditor General for audit assoon as practicable and not later than 3 months after the end of thefinancial year to which the accounts relate.
(5) Within one month after the Comptroller and Auditor General
issues an audit certificate for the accounts of the Authority a copyof the accounts and of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor
29Pt.6 S.34
Accounts of
Authority.Pt.6 S.35
Gifts.
Annual report.
30[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
General on the accounts shall be presented to the Minister who,
within 2 months after their receipt, shall cause copies to be laidbefore each House of the Oireachtas.
(6) If required by the Minister, the Authority shall furnish to the
Minister the information the Minister may require in respect of anybalance sheet, account or report of the Authority.
(7) The Authority, chief executive officer and other employees of
the Authority—
(a) whenever so requested by the Minister, shall permit any
person appointed by the Minister to examine the booksor other records of account of the Authority in respect ofany financial year or other period, and
(b) shall facilitate the examination,
and the Authority shall pay such fee as may be fixed by the Minister
for the examination.
36.—(1) The Authority may accept gifts of money, land or other
property upon the trusts or conditions (if any) as may be specifiedby the donor.
(2) The Authority shall not accept a gift if the trusts or conditions
attaching to it would be inconsistent with the Authority’s—
(a) functions, or
(b) obligations,
under this Act or any other enactment.
37.—(1) Not later than 30 April in each year, the Authority shall
prepare and adopt an annual report in relation to the performanceof the Authority’s functions during the immediately preceding calen-dar year.
(2) An annual report shall include—
(a) a statement of the activities undertaken by the Authority,
(b) the report of the Office of the Chief Inspector of Social
Services on its activities,
(c) a report on the implementation of the Authority’s corpor-
ate plan,
(d) a report on the implementation of the Authority’s busi-
ness plan,
(e) a report on the Authority’s arrangements for imple-
menting and maintaining adherence to its code of govern-ance, and
(f) other particulars that the Authority considers appropriate
or as the Minister may specify, including but not limitedto financial statements.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(3) As soon as may be but in any event not later than 21 days
after adopting the annual report, the Authority shall submit a copyof the annual report to the Minister.
(4) The Minister shall ensure that copies of the annual report are
laid before each House of the Oireachtas within 21 days after theMinister receives the report.
(5) The Authority shall ensure that the annual report is published
on the Internet and in accordance with any other arrangements thatthe Minister may specify, as soon as practicable after copies of thereport are laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.
38.—Subject to any directions given by the Minister under section
29, and on terms and conditions the Authority sees fit to impose, the
Authority may give assistance to a body which performs or proposesto perform a function similar or ancillary to a function that the Auth-ority may perform.
39.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Authority may make
charges as the Authority considers appropriate for the—
(a) provision by the Authority of services other than those
provided by the Authority for or at the request of theMinister, another Minister of the Government, theExecutive or a service provider, or in respect of a servicebeing provided to a person in accordance with section
38, and
(b) carrying on by the Authority of its activities,
and shall record the receipts from those charges as income.
(2) The determination of the amounts of charges referred to in
subsection (1) is subject to the approval of the Minister following
consultations with the Minister for Finance.
(3) The Authority may recover, as a simple contract debt in any
court of competent jurisdiction, from the person by whom it is pay-able any amount due and owing to the Authority under subsection
(1).
PART 7
Office of the Chief Inspector of Social Services
40.—(1) Oifig an Phrı ´omh-Chigire Seirbhı ´sı´So´isialacha or in the
English language the Office of the Chief Inspector of Social Servicesis established and the holder of the office—
(a) shall be known as the Chief Inspector of Social Services,
and
(b) is referred to in this Act as the “chief inspector”.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) and in accordance with section 26 ,
the Authority shall appoint a person to be the chief inspector.
31Pt.6 S.37
Assistance to other
bodies.
Charges for
services.
Office of Chief
Inspector of SocialServices.Pt.7 S.40
Functions of chief
inspector.
32[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(3) Notwithstanding section 26 and with the approval of the Mini-
ster, the Authority may appoint the first chief inspector.
(4) The chief inspector shall be paid the remuneration and any
allowances for expenses that the Authority may determine with theapproval of the Minister given with the consent of the Minister forFinance.
(5) The chief inspector holds office for the period and upon the
terms and conditions that the Authority may determine with theapproval of the Minister given with the consent of the Minister forFinance.
(6) The Authority may dismiss the chief inspector from his or her
office if satisfied that the chief inspector—
(a) has become incapable through ill health of effectively per-
forming the functions of the office,
(b) is adjudicated bankrupt,
(c) is convicted of a criminal offence,
(d) has without reasonable excuse failed to discharge his or
her functions for a continuous period of 3 months begin-ning not earlier than 6 months before the day of dis-missal, or
(e) should be dismissed for any other stated reason.
(7) The person appointed as chief inspector under this section
shall be given, by the Authority, a certificate of his or her appoint-ment and, when exercising any power duly conferred on the chiefinspector under this Act, shall produce, on request by any personaffected, the certificate or a copy of the certificate, together with aform of personal identification.
41.—(1) The functions of the chief inspector are to—
(a) inspect the performance by the Executive of the Execu-
tive’s functions under—
(i) sections 39 to 42 and 53 of the Child Care Act 1991,
and
(ii) section 10 of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990,
(b) establish and maintain one or more registers of desig-
nated centres,
(c) register and inspect designated centres to assess whether
the registered provider is in compliance with the—
(i) regulations, and
(ii) standards, if any, set by the Authority under section
8(1)(b) ,
(d) inspect special care units to assess whether the operator is
in compliance with the—[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(i) regulations respecting special care units under the
Child Care Acts 1991 and 2001, and
(ii) standards, if any, set by the Authority under section
8(1)(b) ,
and
(e) subject to written agreement between the Minister and the
Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform, act as anauthorised person for the purposes of section 185 of theChildren Act 2001, as amended by the Criminal JusticeAct 2006.
(2) If the chief inspector is absent or the position of chief inspec-
tor is vacant, the functions of the chief inspector under this sectionmay be performed by an Inspector of Social Services designated bythe Authority for the purpose of this subsection.
42.—(1) In this section “Committee” means a Committee
appointed by either House of the Oireachtas or jointly by bothHouses of the Oireachtas (other than the Committee referred to insection 24 or the Committee on Members’ Interests of Da ´il E´ireann
or the Committee on Members’ Interests of Seanad E ´ireann) or a
subcommittee of such a Committee.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , the chief inspector, at the request in
writing of a Committee, shall attend before the Committee to give ageneral account of the activities of the Office of the Chief Inspector.
(3) The chief inspector shall not be required to give an account
before a Committee of any matter which is or has been or may at afuture time be the subject of proceedings before a court or tribunalin the State.
(4) Where the chief inspector is of the opinion that a matter in
respect of which he or she is requested to give an account before aCommittee is a matter to which subsection (3) applies, he or she shall
inform the Committee of that opinion and the reasons for theopinion and, unless the information is conveyed to the Committee ata time when the chief inspector is before it, the information shall beso conveyed in writing.
(5) Where the chief inspector has informed a Committee of the
chief inspector’s opinion in accordance with subsection (4) and the
Committee does not withdraw the request referred to in subsection
(2)in so far as it relates to a matter the subject of that opinion—
(a) the chief inspector, not later than 21 days after being
informed by the Committee of its decision not to with-draw the request, may apply to the High Court in a sum-mary manner for determination of the question whetherthe matter is one to which subsection (3) applies, or
(b) the chairperson of the Committee, on behalf of the Com-
mittee, may make such an application,
and the High Court shall determine the matter.
(6) Pending the determination of an application under subsection
(5), the chief inspector shall not attend before the Committee to give
an account of the matter to which the application relates.
33Pt.7 S.41
Accountability of
chief inspector toOireachtasCommittees.Pt.7 S.42
Inspectors of Social
Services.
Plans and reports of
Office of ChiefInspector.
34[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(7) If the High Court determines that the matter concerned is one
to which subsection (3) applies, the Committee shall withdraw the
request referred to in subsection (2) , but if the High Court deter-
mines that subsection (3) does not apply, the chief inspector shall
attend before the Committee to give an account of the matter.
(8) In the performance of the chief inspector’s duties under this
section, the chief inspector shall not question or express an opinionon the merits of any policy of the Government or a Minister of theGovernment or on the merits of the objectives of such a policy.
43.—(1) The Authority, in accordance with section 26 , may
appoint the number of persons as it may determine to assist the chiefinspector in the performance of the chief inspector’s functions and—
(a) the persons appointed shall be known as Inspectors of
Social Services, and
(b) are referred to in this Act as “inspectors”.
(2) An inspector shall perform the functions of the chief inspec-
tor, to the extent the chief inspector may determine, and, in per-forming those functions to that extent, the inspector has the samepowers and duties as the chief inspector has in performing his or herfunctions under this Act.
(3) A person appointed as an inspector under this section shall be
given, by the Authority, a certificate of his or her appointment and,when exercising any power duly conferred on an inspector under thisAct, shall produce, on request by any person affected, the certificateor a copy of the certificate, together with a form of personal identi-fication.
44.—(1) Subject to any directions that may be given by the Auth-
ority, the chief inspector shall prepare—
(a) the corporate plan for the Office of the Chief Inspector
of Social Services to be approved by the Authority andincluded in its corporate plan prepared in accordancewith section 30 , and
(b) the business plan for the Office of the Chief Inspector of
Social Services to be approved by the Authority andincluded in its business plan prepared in accordance withsection 33 .
(2) The chief inspector shall prepare a report on the performance
of his or her functions under section 41 for the preceding year to be
included in the relevant annual report prepared by the Authorityunder section 37 .
(3) Whenever requested by the Authority, the chief inspector
shall furnish information in relation to such matters as the Authoritymay specify.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
45.—(1) The Minister, by written direction, may require the
Executive to carry out inspections of—
(a) children’s residential centres, as defined in section 2(1) of
the Child Care Act 1991, which are provided in accord-ance with section 38(1) of that Act, or
(b) nursing homes as defined in section 2 of the Health
(Nursing Homes) Act 1990.
(2) The Executive in acting under this section acts on behalf of
the chief inspector and in acting on that behalf has the same powersand duties as the chief inspector has in carrying out inspections underthis Act.
(3) An inspection under this section must be carried out by the
Executive in the manner specified by the chief inspector and inaccordance with the regulations and any standards which may be setby the Authority.
(4) The chief inspector may require the Executive to provide the
chief inspector with any information the chief inspector needs inrelation to an inspection or proposed inspection under this section.
(5) Expenses incurred by the Executive in carrying out functions
in accordance with this section shall be paid from money providedby the Oireachtas to the Executive.
PART 8
Regulation of Designated Centres
46.—(1) A person shall not carry on the business of a designated
centre unless the centre is registered under this Act and the personis its registered provider.
(2) The person in charge of a designated centre, whether that per-
son is the registered provider or another person, shall not manageor participate in the management of the centre unless the centre isregistered under this Act.
47.—In, or in respect of, an application for registration or renewal
of registration under this Part, a person shall not knowingly make astatement which is false or misleading in a material respect.
48.—(1) A person seeking to register or renew the registration of
a designated centre under this Part shall make an application for itsregistration or renewal of registration to the chief inspector.
(2) The applicant shall include with the application—
(a) the prescribed information about prescribed matters,
(b) any other information which the chief inspector reason-
ably requires the applicant to include, and
(c) the prescribed application fee.
35Pt.7
Arrangements with
Executive.
Prohibition against
carrying onunregistereddesignated centre.
Prohibition against
false or misleadingapplications forregistration.
Applications for
registration.Pt.8 S.48
Register of
designated centres.
36[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(3) An application under subsection (1) for the renewal of the
registration of a designated centre must be made at least 6 months,or a lesser period that the chief inspector may specify, before theexpiry date of the current registration.
(4) If an application under subsection (1) for the renewal of the
registration of a designated centre—
(a) is made within the time limited under subsection (3) , and
(b) the decision under section 50 to grant or refuse the regis-
tration is not made before the expiry date of the currentregistration,
the registration remains in effect until that decision is made.
(5) A person who wishes to carry on or manage more than one
designated centre shall make a separate application for the regis-tration, or the renewal of the registration, of each of the centres.
49.—(1) For each registered designated centre there shall be
entered in the appropriate register established and maintained undersection 41 by the chief inspector—
(a) the name of the centre,
(b) the name—
(i) of the registered provider of the centre, and
(ii) of the person who is in charge of the centre whether
that person is its registered provider or anotherperson,
(c) the address of the premises in which the business of the
centre is carried on,
(d) a statement of the number of residents who can be accom-
modated in the centre,
(e) the date on which the registration of the centre is to take
effect (referred to in this Act as “the date ofregistration”),
(f) any conditions attached to the registration of the centre,
and
(g) such other particulars as the Minister may prescribe.
(2) Subject to sections 48 and 51, the registration of a designated
centre is for 3 years.
(3) The registers shall be—
(a) kept at the office of the chief inspector,
(b) open to inspection by members of the public free of
charge, during normal business hours, and
(c) made available on the Internet and by any other means
that the Minister specifies.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(4) On request, a copy of an entry in any register maintained by
the chief inspector shall be issued by the chief inspector on paymentof the fee, if any, not exceeding the reasonable cost of making thecopy, as may be determined by the chief inspector.
50.—(1) Where an application is made under section 48 for the
registration or renewal of the registration of a designated centre,the chief inspector, if satisfied that the person who is the registered
provider, or intended registered provider, and each other person whowill participate in the management of the designated centre—
(a) is a fit person to be the registered provider of the desig-
nated centre and to participate in its management, and
(b) if the application is for registration, will comply with, or,
if for renewal, is in compliance with—
(i) standards set by the Authority under section 8(1)(b) ,
(ii) regulations under section 101 , and
(iii) any other enactment which appears to the chief
inspector to be relevant, and is cited to the applicantin writing by the chief inspector,
shall grant the application and if not so satisfied shall refuse it.
(2) The chief inspector in granting an application under this
section may—
(a) attach to the registration conditions that the chief inspec-
tor thinks fit in relation to the designated centre con-cerned, and
(b) attach different conditions in relation to the registration of
different designated centres or of different categories ofdesignated centres.
(3) On granting the application, the chief inspector shall issue a
certificate of registration to the applicant, having first noted on thecertificate—
(a) the enactments, if any, cited to the applicant under subsec-
tion (1)(b)(iii) , and
(b) the conditions, if any, attached to the registration under
subsection (2) .
51.—(1) At any time, the chief inspector, on one or more of the
grounds specified in subsection (2) may—
(a) cancel the registration of a designated centre,
(b) vary or remove any condition of the registration of a desig-
nated centre, or
(c) attach an additional condition to the registration of a des-
ignated centre.
37Pt.8 S.49
Grant or refusal of
registration.
Cancelling
registration, varyingconditions ofregistration orimposing newconditions, forcause.Pt.8 S.51
Applications by
registeredproviders.
38[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(2) The following are the grounds referred to in subsection (1) :
(a) that the registered provider, or any other person who par-
ticipates in the management of the designated centre hasbeen convicted of one or more of the following:
(i) an offence under this Act;
(ii) an offence under an enactment cited by the chief
inspector in accordance with section 50(1)(b)(iii) and
noted in accordance with section 50(3) on the regis-
tered provider’s certificate of registration;
(iii) an offence under the Child Care Act 1991;
(iv) an offence against the person;
(b) that, in the opinion of the chief inspector, the registered
provider or any other person who participates in the man-agement of the centre is not a fit person to be the regis-tered provider of the centre or to participate in itsmanagement;
(c) that the designated centre is being, or has at any time
been, carried on otherwise than in accordance with—
(i) any requirements or conditions imposed by or under
this Act, or
(ii) any other statutory provision which the chief inspec-
tor considers to be relevant.
52.—(1) A registered provider carrying on the business of a desig-
nated centre may apply to the chief inspector for the variation orremoval of any condition of the registration of the designated centre.
(2) The chief inspector may grant an application under subsection
(1)if satisfied that the variation or removal of the condition is—
(a) appropriate in the circumstances, and
(b) will not adversely affect the persons who are resident in
the designated centre,
and if not so satisfied shall refuse the application.
(3) An application under subsection (1) shall be made in the pre-
scribed manner, state the prescribed particulars and be accompaniedby the prescribed application fee.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) —
(a) different amounts may be prescribed for different circum-
stances or different categories of designated centres, and
(b) the regulations may provide for the chief inspector to
determine which of the different amounts is payable in aparticular case.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
53.—If the chief inspector proposes—
(a) under section 50 or52, to refuse an application,
(b) under section 50 or52, to grant an application subject to
any conditions, or
(c) under section 51 , to—
(i) cancel the registration of a designated centre,
(ii) vary or remove any condition of the registration of a
designated centre, or
(iii) attach an additional condition to the registration of a
designated centre,
the chief inspector shall give the applicant or the registered provider
of the designated centre, as the case may be, written notice of theproposal, stating the particulars.
54.—(1) A written notice of a proposal under section 53 shall state
that, within a time limit of 28 days after the notice is given, the appli-cant or the registered provider, as the case may be, may make writtenrepresentations to the chief inspector concerning the matter which isthe subject matter of the proposal.
(2) Where written notice of a proposal has been given under
section 53 , the chief inspector shall not decide the matter that is the
subject of the proposal until—
(a) the person to whom the notice was given has—
(i) made written representations to the chief inspector
concerning the proposal, or
(ii) notified the chief inspector in writing that the person
does not intend to make representations,
or
(b) the time limit of 28 days referred to in subsection (1) has
elapsed.
55.—(1) The chief inspector shall give written notice to the appli-
cant or the registered provider, as the case may be, of a decision—
(a) under section 50 or52, to refuse an application,
(b) under section 50 or52, to grant an application subject to
any conditions, or
(c) under section 51 , to—
(i) cancel the registration of a designated centre,
(ii) vary or remove any condition of the registration of a
designated centre, or
39Pt.8
Notice of certain
proposed decisionsof chief inspector.
Right to respond to
notice of proposeddecision.
Notice of decisions
of chief inspector.Pt.8 S.55
Required or
prohibited conductin relation todesignated centre.
Appeal to District
Court from decisionof chief inspectorrespectingregistration.
40[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(iii) attach an additional condition to the registration of a
designated centre.
(2) A written notice under this section shall inform the applicant
or the registered provider, as the case may be, of the right of appealconferred by section 57 .
(3) A decision referred to in subsection (1) does not take effect—
(a) if no appeal from the decision is brought, until the expir-
ation of 28 days, or a longer period determined by thechief inspector, after the receipt by the applicant or regis-tered provider of written notice under this section, or
(b) if an appeal to the District Court from the decision is
brought, until the determination or withdrawal of thatappeal.
56.—(1) The registered provider carrying on the business of a des-
ignated centre shall ensure that the certificate of registration issuedfor the designated centre is affixed in a conspicuous place at thecentre.
(2) The registered provider carrying on the business of a desig-
nated centre shall not, in an application under section 52 for the
variation or removal of any condition of the registration of the desig-nated centre, knowingly make a statement which is false or mislead-ing in a material respect.
(3) Unless registration as a designated centre of a particular
description has been effected under this Part in respect of a premises,undertaking or organisation, a person shall not, with intent todeceive another person,
(a) apply a name to the premises, undertaking or organisation
that in any way describes it as a designated centre of thatdescription, or
(b) hold out the premises, undertaking or organisation as a
designated centre of that description.
(4) The registered provider carrying on the business of a desig-
nated centre shall not describe or hold out the designated centre asable to—
(a) provide a service, the provision of which would be in con-
travention of a condition of the registration of the desig-nated centre, or
(b) do anything else, the doing of which would be in contra-
vention of a condition of the registration of the desig-nated centre.
57.—(1) The registered provider carrying on the business of a des-
ignated centre, or a person applying to be registered in respect of adesignated centre, may appeal to the District Court from a decisionof the chief inspector under section 50 ,51or52.
(2) The registered provider or other person who appeals to the
District Court under subsection (1) —[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) shall bring the appeal within 28 days after the receipt by
the person of written notice under section 55 of the
decision, and
(b) at the same time as the appeal is brought, shall give to the
chief inspector written notice of the appeal.
(3) A registered provider carrying on the business of a designated
centre who appeals to the District Court under this section may con-tinue to carry on that business until the determination or withdrawalof that appeal or of a further appeal under section 62 .
(4) On an appeal under subsection (1) , the District Court, as it
considers appropriate, may confirm the decision of the chief inspec-tor or direct the chief inspector to—
(a) register or renew the registration of the designated centre,
(b) restore the registration of the designated centre,
(c) vary or remove a condition of the registration, or
(d) attach an additional condition to the registration.
(5) An appeal under subsection (1) shall be made to a District
Court judge assigned to the district in which the designated centreis located.
58.—(1) If the chief inspector believes on reasonable grounds that
any person is carrying on the business of a designated centre in con-travention of a decision—
(a) under section 50 or52, to refuse an application,
(b) under section 50 or52, to grant an application subject to
any conditions, or
(c) under section 51 , to—
(i) cancel the registration of a designated centre,
(ii) vary or remove any condition of the registration of a
designated centre, or
(iii) attach an additional condition to the registration of a
designated centre,
the chief inspector may apply to the District Court for an
order to enforce the decision.
(2) The District Court, on hearing an application under this
section, may make an order—
(a) in the terms sought by the chief inspector in the appli-
cation, or
(b) in other terms as the Court considers appropriate.
(3) An application under subsection (1) shall be made to the Dis-
trict Court judge assigned to the district in which the designatedcentre is located.
41Pt.8 S.57
Chief inspector may
seek District Courtorder enforcingcertain decisions.Pt.8
Chief inspector may
seek District Courtorder forcancellation orvariation ofregistration.
Ex parte interim
order inproceedings undersection 59 .
42[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
59.—(1) If the chief inspector believes on reasonable grounds that
there is a risk to the life, or a serious risk to the health or welfare,of the persons resident in a designated centre, because of any act,failure to act or negligence on the part of—
(a) the registered provider carrying on the business of the des-
ignated centre, or
(b) a person acting on behalf of the registered provider,
the chief inspector may apply to the District Court for an order—
(i) cancelling the registration of the designated centre,
(ii) varying or removing any condition attached to the regis-
tration of the designated centre, or
(iii) attaching an additional condition to the registration of the
designated centre.
(2) Notice of an application for a final determination of the
matters that are the subject of the application must be given by thechief inspector to the registered provider.
(3) The District Court, on hearing an application under this
section, may make an order—
(a) in the terms sought by the chief inspector in the appli-
cation, or
(b) in other terms as the Court considers appropriate.
(4) An application under subsection (1) shall be made to a District
Court judge assigned to the district in which the designated centreis located.
60.—(1) An application under section 59 by the chief inspector
may be made ex parte and without notice for an interim order (in
this section and in section 61 c a l l e da n“ ex parte interim order”) and,
on that application, an ex parte interim order may be made—
(a) in the terms sought by the chief inspector in the appli-
cation, or
(b) in other terms as the District Court considers appropriate,
if, having regard to the circumstances of the particular case, the court
considers it necessary or expedient to make the order immediatelyin the best interests of the persons resident in the designated centre.
(2) The application for an ex parte interim order shall be
grounded on an affidavit sworn by the chief inspector or by an indi-vidual acting on behalf of the chief inspector.
(3) The ex parte interim order has effect for a period, to be speci-
fied in the order, not exceeding 28 days and ceases to have effect atthe end of that period unless—
(a) by consent of the parties, or
(b) on application by the chief inspector on notice to the per-
son who was the designated centre’s registered provider[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
at the time of the application made ex parte under
section 59 ,
the District Court within that period confirms the ex parte interim
order with effect for a specified further period.
(4) Subsection (3) does not affect any right of a party to pro-
ceedings commenced under section 59 to apply to the District Court
in the proceedings.
(5) The chief inspector, as soon as practicable, shall serve on the
person who was the registered provider at the time of the ex parte
application a copy of—
(a) the ex parte interim order, and
(b) the affidavit referred to in subsection (2) .
(6) In respect of the ex parte application, the chief inspector must
provide the Executive with a copy of the application and of the affi-davit referred to in subsection (2) and, where an ex parte interim
order is made, must provide the Executive with a copy of the order.
(7) If an ex parte interim order ceases to have effect because of
the operation of subsection (3) then, effective on the next day after
that order ceases to have effect—
(a) the registration of the designated centre and the status as
registered provider of the person who was the centre’sregistered provider at the time of the ex parte application
under section 59(1) are reinstated, and
(b) the designated centre and the registered provider are
restored to the same status under this Act as they hadimmediately before the date of the ex parte application
under section 59 .
61.—(1) Within 42 days after the date of an ex parte interim order,
the chief inspector may apply to the District Court for a final deter-mination of the matters dealt with in the order.
(2) Notice of an application under this section must be given by
the chief inspector to the person who was the designated centre’sregistered provider at the time of the ex parte application made
under section 59 .
(3) On the hearing of the application for a final determination of
the matters dealt with in the ex parte interim order, the District Court
may make an order—
(a) confirming, varying or setting aside the ex parte interim
order,
(b) reinstating the registration of the designated centre and
the status as registered provider of the person who wasthe centre’s registered provider at the time of the ex parte
application made under section 59 , if the registration was
cancelled under the ex parte interim order, or
(c) make any other order the Court considers appropriate.
43Pt.8 S.60
Final determination
of matters dealtwith in an ex parte
interim order undersection 59 .Pt.8 S.61
Appeals to Circuit
Court fromdecisions of DistrictCourt.
Status of chief
inspector in courtproceedings.
Care of residents on
cancellation ofregistration.
44[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(4) If the chief inspector does not apply, within the 42 days set
out in subsection (1) , for a final determination of the matters dealt
with in the ex parte interim order, then, effective on the next day
after expiry of the 42 days—
(a) the ex parte interim order ceases to have effect,
(b) the registration of the designated centre and the status as
registered provider of the person who was the centre’sregistered provider at the time of the ex parte application
under section 59 are reinstated, and
(c) the designated centre and the registered provider are
restored to the same status under this Act as they hadimmediately before the date of the ex parte application
under section 59 .
62.—An appeal lies to the Circuit Court from a decision of the
District Court under section 57(4) ,59(3) or61(3) .
63.—The chief inspector is a party to any court proceedings under
this Part and is entitled in any such proceedings to appear, be heard,adduce evidence and give evidence.
64.—(1) If the chief inspector—
(a) cancels a registration under section 51 and the cancellation
takes effect, or
(b) obtains an order to cancel a registration in accordance with
section 59 and the cancellation takes effect,
the chief inspector shall notify the Executive forthwith of the cancel-
lation and of the date on which the cancellation has effect.
(2) The Executive, as soon as practicable after notification under
subsection (1) , shall make alternative arrangements for the residents
of the designated centre.
(3) Where the Executive, immediately before the cancellation,
was the registered provider of the designated centre, the Executive,pending the alternative arrangements referred to in subsection (2) ,
notwithstanding the cancellation, may continue to carry on the busi-ness of the designated centre as if it were registered under this Actwith the Executive as its registered provider.
(4) Where the Executive, immediately before the cancellation,
was not the registered provider of the designated centre, then, pend-ing the alternative arrangements referred to in subsection (2) , the
Executive, either—
(a) with the consent of the person who, immediately before
the effective date of the cancellation, was the registeredprovider, or
(b) by order of the District Court,
shall take charge of the designated centre, and may carry on its busi-
ness as if the designated centre were registered under this Act withthe Executive as its registered provider.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
65.—A registered provider of a designated centre shall submit to
the chief inspector such information at such time as the chief inspec-tor considers necessary to enable the chief inspector to carry out thechief inspector’s functions.
66.—(1) The registered provider carrying on the business of a des-
ignated centre shall not cease to carry on its business and close thedesignated centre unless the registered provider first gives the chiefinspector written notice, of such period as may be prescribed, of theintention to do so as of a date specified in the notice.
(2) Different periods may be prescribed for different categories
of designated centres.
67.—If a registered provider ceases to carry on the business of a
designated centre and closes the centre, the chief inspector shall—
(a) make a note to that effect in the appropriate register, and
(b) cancel the registration of the designated centre.
68.—(1) A person who is appointed by or under the law to take
charge of a designated centre in place of its registered provider, shallgive notice of the appointment to the chief inspector, as soon aspracticable, but not later than 48 hours after the appointment.
(2) The chief inspector may accept a later notification where the
chief inspector is of the opinion that it would be right and proper todo so.
(3) Where the chief inspector receives information in accordance
with subsection (1) and has reason to believe that it is in the interests
of the health and welfare of the residents—
(a) he or she may notify the Executive, and
(b) the Executive may make alternative arrangements for the
residents of the centre.
69.—(1) In this section “institution” means any—
(a) institution or part of one,
(b) residential centre or part of one, or
(c) home or part of one,
that, immediately before the coming into operation of this Part, is a
designated centre as defined in section 2(1).
(2) A person who immediately before the date this Part comes
into operation was carrying on the business of an institution andproviding residential services at the institution may continue to doso, notwithstanding section 46 , for a period not exceeding 3 years or
such shorter period as the chief inspector may determine.
45Pt.8
Submission of
information.
Prohibition against
closure ofdesignated centrewithout notice.
Cancellation of
registration onclosure ofdesignated centre.
Notice of
appointment underlaw to take chargeof designatedcentre.
Transitional
provision forregistration ofexisting designatedcentres.Pt.8 S.69
Appointment by the
Authority ofauthorised persons.
Appointment by
Executive ofpersons to examinedesignated centres.
46[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(3) A person carrying on the business of an institution in accord-
ance with subsection (2) shall notify the chief inspector that the per-
son is carrying on that business, as soon as practicable, but not laterthan 6 months after the centre becomes a designated centre inaccordance with the provisions of this Act.
(4) During the period described in subsection (2) in which a per-
son, in accordance with that subsection, may carry on the businessof an institution, this Act applies to the person and to the institutionas if the institution were a registered designated centre under thisAct with the person as its registered provider.
PART 9
Inspections and Investigations
70.—(1) The Authority shall appoint, with the approval of the
Minister given with the consent of the Minister for Finance, one ormore persons with appropriate qualifications and experience for thepurposes of—
(a) monitoring compliance with standards in accordance with
section 8(1)(c) ,o r
(b) an investigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) undertaken
by the Authority,
and a person so appointed shall be known as an authorised person.
(2) At the request of an authorised person, the Authority may
appoint such other number of persons that the Authority may deter-mine, to assist that authorised person in the performance of the auth-orised person’s functions and the persons appointed shall be author-ised persons for the purposes of—
(a) monitoring compliance with standards in accordance with
section 8(1)(c) ,o r
(b) an investigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) .
(3) An authorised person shall be paid the remuneration and
allowances for expenses that the Authority may determine with theapproval of the Minister given with the consent of the Minister forFinance.
(4) Each authorised person shall be given a certificate of his or
her appointment and, when exercising any power conferred on theAuthority, shall produce, on request by any person affected, the cer-tificate or a copy of the certificate, together with a form of personalidentification.
71.—(1) For the purpose of assessing compliance with the terms
and conditions, regulations and standards and other statutory obli-gations referred to in subsection (2) , the Executive may appoint per-
sons to examine any premises of a service provider in which thebusiness of a designated centre is being carried on.
(2) The following are the terms and conditions, regulations and
standards and other statutory obligations for the purposes of subsec-
tion (1) :[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) the terms and conditions applicable in respect of any—
(i) arrangement under section 38 of the Health Act 2004,
(ii) assistance given in accordance with section 39 of the
Health Act 2004, and
(iii) assistance given in accordance with section 10 of the
Child Care Act 1991;
(b) any regulations and any standards made in respect of the
category of designated centres to which the designatedcentre referred to in subsection (1) belongs; and
(c) any other statutory obligations in relation to that desig-
nated centre.
(3) A person appointed under subsection (1) may—
(a) enter any designated centre maintained by a service pro-
vider and examine, as he or she thinks fit, the state andmanagement of the premises and the care or treatmentof residents of the centre, and
(b) examine any records in relation to the centre and
interview—
(i) any employee of the centre, or
(ii) any resident of the centre with the resident’s consent.
(4) The person in charge of a designated centre, whether that per-
son is the registered provider or another person, shall—
(a) allow a person appointed under subsection (1) to enter the
designated centre for the purpose of any examination
under subsection (2) , and
(b) co-operate with that person throughout the course of the
examination.
72.—(1) At the request of the chief inspector, the Authority may
appoint, with the approval of the Minister, one or more persons, withexpertise relevant to an inspection referred to in section 41 , to—
(a) accompany the chief inspector or inspector during the
inspection, and
(b) assist and advise the chief inspector or an inspector on
matters related to the purpose of the inspection that arewithin the expertise of the person or persons soappointed.
(2) A person appointed under this section shall be paid the
remuneration and allowances for expenses that the Authority maydetermine with the approval of the Minister given with the consentof the Minister for Finance.
47Pt.9 S.71
Appointment of
qualified persons toassist chiefinspector andinspectors in aninspection.Pt.9
Right of entry and
inspection byauthorised personor chief inspector.
48[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
73.—(1) If an authorised person considers it necessary or expedi-
ent for the purposes of—
(a) monitoring compliance with standards in accordance with
section 8(1)(c) ,o r
(b) an investigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) ,
the authorised person may enter and inspect at any time any
premises—
(i) owned or controlled by the Executive or a service pro-
vider, or
(ii) used or proposed to be used, for any purpose connected
with the provision of services described in section 8(1)(b) .
(2) If the chief inspector considers it necessary or expedient for
the purposes of an inspection referred to in section 41 , the chief
inspector may enter and inspect at any time any premises—
(a) owned or controlled by the Executive,
(b) used, or proposed to be used, for any purpose connected
with the provision of a service under sections 39 to 42and 53 of the Child Care Act 1991 or section 10 of theHealth (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 by the Executive or aservice provider, or
(c) used or proposed to be used as a designated centre or
special care unit.
(3) If an authorised person considers it necessary or expedient for
the purposes of monitoring compliance with standards in accordancewith section 8(1)(c) , or of an investigation referred to in section
8(1)(d) , or the chief inspector considers it necessary or expedient for
the purposes of an inspection referred to in section 41 —
(a) the authorised person, at any time, may carry out the func-
tions conferred on the authorised person under thissection and sections 75 and 76to the extent that the func-
tions relate to any premises referred to in subsection
(1), and
(b) the chief inspector, at any time, may carry out the func-
tions conferred on the chief inspector under this sectionand sections 75 and 76to the extent that the functions
relate to any premises referred to in subsection (2) .
(4) An authorised person, in respect of premises referred to in
subsection (1) , or the chief inspector, in respect of premises referred
to in subsection (2) , may—
(a) inspect, take copies of or extracts from and remove from
the premises any documents or records (including per-sonal records) relating to the discharge of its functions bythe Executive, or to the services provided by a serviceprovider or at a designated centre or a special care unit,
(b) inspect the operation of any computer and any associated
apparatus or material which is or has been in use in con-nection with the records in question,[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(c) inspect any other item and remove it from the premises—
(i) if an authorised person considers it necessary or
expedient for the purposes of monitoring compliancewith standards in accordance with section 8(1)(c) ,o r
of an investigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) ,o r
(ii) the chief inspector considers it necessary or expedient
for the purposes of an inspection referred to insection 41 ,
(d) interview in private any person—
(i) working at the premises concerned, or
(ii) who at any time was or is in receipt of a service at the
premises and who consents to be interviewed,
and
(e) make any other examination into the state and manage-
ment of the premises or the standard of any services pro-vided at the premises.
(5) At any time, an authorised person, in respect of premises
referred to in subsection (1) or the chief inspector, in respect of
premises referred to in subsection (2) , may require any person who—
(a) is in charge of the premises or of services provided at the
premises, or
(b) possesses or is in charge of any records held at the prem-
ises or in respect of any services provided at the premises,even if the records are held elsewhere,
to furnish the authorised person or the chief inspector, as the case
may be, with the information—
(i) the authorised person reasonably requires for the purposes
of monitoring compliance with standards in accordancewith section 8(1)(c) , or of an investigation referred to in
section 8(1)(d) ,o r
(ii) the chief inspector reasonably requires for the purposes of
an inspection referred to in section 41 ,
and to make available to the authorised person or chief inspector
any document or record in the power or control of the persondescribed in paragraph (a) or(b)of this subsection that, in the
opinion of the authorised person, is relevant to the monitoring ofcompliance with the standards or to the investigation or, in theopinion of the chief inspector, is relevant to the inspection.
(6) If a person is required under this section to produce a docu-
ment or record and that document or record is kept by means of acomputer, the authorised person, for premises referred to in subsec-
tion (1) , or the chief inspector, for premises referred to in subsection
(2), may require the person who is required to produce that docu-
ment or record to produce it in a form which is legible and can betaken away.
49Pt.9 S.73Pt.9 S.73
Requirement for
occupier’s consentor District Courtwarrant to enterdwelling.
Further
circumstances inwhich DistrictCourt may issuewarrant.
50[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(7) If an authorised person, in respect of premises referred to in
subsection (1) , considers an explanation necessary and expedient for
the purposes of—
(a) monitoring compliance with standards in accordance with
section 8(1)(c) ,o r
(b) an investigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) ,
the authorised person may require a person who is in charge of the
premises or possesses or is in charge of any relevant documents orrecords to provide an explanation of any—
(i) document or record inspected, copied or provided in
accordance with this section,
(ii) other information provided in the course of the investi-
gation, or
(iii) other matters which are the subject of the functions being
exercised by the authorised person under this section.
(8) If the chief inspector, in respect of premises referred to in
subsection (2) , considers an explanation necessary and expedient for
the purposes of conducting an inspection under this section, the chiefinspector may require a person who is in charge of the premises ora person who possesses or is in charge of any documents or recordswhich are the subject of the inspection to provide an explanationof any—
(a) documents or records inspected, copied or provided in
accordance with this section,
(b) other information provided in the course of the inspec-
tion, or
(c) other matters which are the subject of the functions being
exercised by the chief inspector under this section.
74.—(1) In this section “dwelling” includes any part of a desig-
nated centre occupied as a private residence by the registered pro-vider of the designated centre or by a member of the staff of theregistered provider.
(2) Notwithstanding section 73 , an authorised person or the chief
inspector, in the performance of functions under that section, maynot enter a dwelling other than—
(a) with the consent of the occupier, or
(b) in accordance with a warrant from the District Court
issued under section 75(2) authorising the entry.
75.—(1) Where—
(a) in relation to any premises referred to in section 73(1) ,a n
authorised person monitoring compliance with the stan-dards in accordance with section 8(1)(c) or conducting an
investigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) ,o r[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(b) in relation to any premises referred to in section 73(2) , the
chief inspector conducting an inspection referred to insection 41 ,
is prevented or has reasonable cause to believe there is a likelihood
that he or she will be prevented from entering the premises, an appli-cation may be made to the District Court for a warrant under subsec-
tion (2) authorising the entry.
(2) If a judge of the District Court is satisfied on the sworn infor-
mation of an authorised person or the chief inspector that there arereasonable grounds for believing—
(a) that there are any records (including records stored in a
non-legible form) relating to a service or to a registeredprovider, designated centre or special care unit, or thatthere is anything being used at the premises referred toinsection 73(1) or(2), which—
(i) the authorised person considers it necessary to inspect
for the purposes of monitoring compliance with stan-dards in accordance with section 8(1)(c) or an inves-
tigation referred to in section 8(1)(d) ,o r
(ii) the chief inspector considers it necessary to inspect
for the purposes of an inspection referred to insection 41 ,
or
(b) that there is, or such an inspection is likely to disclose,
evidence of a contravention of this Act or the regulationsor, in the case of an inspection referred to in paragraph
(a)(ii) , a contravention of—
(i) this Act or the regulations,
(ii) the provisions, specified in section 41(a), of this Act,
of the other Acts referred to in section 41(a) ,o r
(iii) the regulations or standards referred to in section
41(c) or(d),
the judge may issue a warrant permitting the authorised person or
the chief inspector or an inspector, accompanied by other personswith appropriate qualifications, or by members of the Garda Sı ´och-
a´na as may be necessary, at any time or times, within one month
after the date of issue of the warrant, on production of the warrantif requested, to enter the premises, if need be by reasonable force,and to perform the functions conferred by or under section 73 .
76.—If an authorised person or the chief inspector—
(a) has reasonable cause to expect any serious obstruction in
the performance of functions under this Act, and
(b) is in possession of a warrant under section 75(2) ,
the authorised person or chief inspector, when performing those
functions, may be accompanied by a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na.
51Pt.9 S.75
Authorised person
or chief inspectormay beaccompanied byGarda.Pt.9
Prohibition against
certain conduct inrelation toinspections undersection 73 .
Reports of
authorised persons,the chief inspectorand inspectors.
Offences.
52[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
77.—A person shall not—
(a) refuse to allow a person who under section 73 is monitor-
ing compliance with standards, or conducting an investi-gation or inspection—
(i) to enter any premises other than a dwelling in accord-
ance with that section or in accordance with a war-rant issued by the District Court, or
(ii) to enter any dwelling in accordance with that section
under and in accordance with a warrant issued bythe District Court,
or
(b) obstruct or impede a person conducting an investigation
or inspection under section 73 in the exercise of functions
under that section, or
(c) give to a person conducting an investigation or inspection
under section 73 information that the person giving the
information knows, or should reasonably know, to befalse or misleading.
78.—The Authority, an authorised person, the chief inspector, an
inspector or a person appointed under section 72 is not liable in
damages arising from any—
(a) report or other document prepared, or
(b) communication made,
in good faith, for the purposes of, or in connection with, the perform-
ance of the functions—
(i) under section 70 of an authorised person appointed under
that section,
(ii) under section 41 of the chief inspector, or
(iii) performed under section 43 by an inspector appointed
under that section.
PART 10
Offences
79.—(1) A person is guilty of an offence if the person—
(a) fails to discharge a duty to which the person is subject
under section 69(3) ,o r
(b) contravenes section 46 ,47,o r77.
(2) A registered provider carrying on the business of a designated
centre is guilty of an offence if the registered provider—
(a) fails to discharge a duty to which the registered provider
is subject under section 56(1) or65,[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(b) contravenes section 56(2) ,(3)or(4),o r66(1) ,
(c) fails to discharge a duty to which the registered provider
is subject under a provision of the regulations,
(d) contravenes a provision of the regulations, or
(e) fails to comply with a condition of the registration of the
designated centre.
(3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment to a fine not exceeding
\70,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years
or both.
(4) A registered provider guilty of an offence under subsection (2)
is liable—
(a) on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment to a fine not exceeding
\70,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years
or both.
80.—(1) Summary proceedings for an offence under this Act may
be brought and prosecuted—
(a) where a person contravenes section 77 by refusing to allow
an authorised person to monitor compliance with stan-dards or conduct an investigation, by the Authority,
(b) in any other case, by the chief inspector.
(2) Notwithstanding section 10(4) of the Petty Sessions (Ireland)
Act 1851, summary proceedings for an offence under this Act maybe commenced any time within—
(a) 12 months after the date of the offence, or
(b) 6 months after the date on which evidence first comes to
the knowledge of the Authority or the chief inspectorthat is sufficient, in the opinion of the Authority or thechief inspector, to justify the bringing of the proceedings,provided that the proceedings are commenced not laterthan 2 years after the date of the offence.
(3) A document, purporting to have been issued by the Authority,
in the case of a contravention of section 77 described in section
80(1)(a) , or by the chief inspector, in any other case, certifying the
date on which the evidence described in subsection (2) first came to
the knowledge of the Authority or the chief inspector—
(a) is admissible without proof of the signature or official
character of the person appearing to have signed thedocument, and
53Pt.10 S.79
Proceedings for
offences.Pt.10 S.80
Standards of
integrity.
Codes of conduct.
54[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(b) in the absence of evidence to the contrary, is proof of the
matters certified in the document.
(4) Where an offence under this Act—
(a) is committed by a body corporate, by a person purporting
to act on behalf of a body corporate or by an individualor an unincorporated body of persons, and
(b) is proved to have been committed with the consent or
approval of, or to have been attributable to any neglecton the part of, any person who, when the offence wascommitted, was—
(i) a director, member of the committee of management
or other controlling authority of the body con-cerned, or
(ii) the manager, secretary or other officer of the body
concerned,
that person shall also be deemed to have committed the offence and
may be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
PART 11
Standards, Disqualifications, etc.
81.—(1) In performing functions under this or any other enact-
ment as—
(a) a member of the Board or a committee of the Board,
(b) the chief executive officer, the chief inspector or any other
employee of the Authority,
(c) a person engaged by the Authority as an adviser under
section 28 ,o r
(d) an employee of a person referred to in paragraph (c) ,
a person shall maintain proper standards of integrity, conduct and
concern for the public interest.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to an employee of a person referred to
insubsection (1)(c) in respect only of duties of employment relating
to the purposes for which the Authority has engaged that person.
82.—(1) For the purposes of section 81(1) , the Authority shall
issue codes of conduct for the guidance of persons who are—
(a) members of a committee of the Board but are not
members of the Board,
(b) employees of the Authority other than employees to
whom a code of conduct under section 10(3) of the Stan-dards in Public Office Act 2001 applies,
(c) engaged under section 28 by the Authority as advisers, or[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(d) employees of persons referred to in paragraph (c) .
(2) A code of conduct issued under this section for the guidance
of persons referred to in subsection (1) must indicate the standards
of integrity and conduct to be maintained by them in performingtheir functions under this or any other enactment.
(3) A person to whom the code of conduct relates shall have
regard to and be guided by the code in performing functions underthis or any other enactment.
(4) The terms and conditions on which a person is employed by
the Authority or by a person referred to in subsection (1)(c) or on
which a person is engaged by the Authority as an adviser are deemedto include any requirements that apply to that person under subsec-
tion (3) .
83.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , the Authority, as soon as prac-
ticable after issuing a code of conduct, shall make the code availableto the persons for whose guidance it was issued.
(2) A code of conduct for the guidance of employees of a person
engaged by the Authority as an adviser shall be issued by the Auth-ority to the employer and be made available by the employer tothose employees.
(3) In the absence of evidence to the contrary, a document pur-
porting to be a code of conduct issued under this section—
(a) is such code, and
(b) is admissible in any proceedings before a court or other
tribunal,
and any provision of the code of conduct that appears to the court
or other tribunal to be relevant to a question in the proceedingsmay be taken into account by the court or tribunal in determiningthe question.
84.—(1) In this section “confidential information” means—
(a) information that is expressed by the Authority to be confi-
dential either as regards particular information or asregards information of a particular class or description, or
(b) proposals of a commercial nature or tenders submitted to
the Authority by any person.
(2) Except in the circumstances set out in subsection (3) , a person
shall not disclose confidential information obtained while performingfunctions as—
(a) a member of the Board or a committee,
(b) the chief executive officer or any other employee of the
Authority,
(c) a person engaged by the Authority as an adviser,
(d) an employee of a person referred to in paragraph (c) ,
55Pt.11 S.82
Availability of
codes of conduct.
Prohibition against
unauthoriseddisclosure ofconfidentialinformation.Pt.11 S.84
Disqualification
resulting frommembership ofeither House ofOireachtas or ofEuropeanParliament or localauthority.
56[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(e) a person appointed as an authorised person under section
70,o r
(f) a person appointed under section 72 .
(3) A person does not contravene subsection (2) by disclosing con-
fidential information if the disclosure—
(a) is authorised by the Authority,
(b) is made to the Board,
(c) is made to the Minister by or on behalf of the Authority
or in compliance with this Act, or
(d) is required by law.
85.—(1) A member of the Board of the Authority or a member
of a committee of the Board of the Authority immediately ceases tohold office on—
(a) being nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) being elected as a member of either House of the
Oireachtas or of the European Parliament,
(c) being regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European
Parliament Elections Act 1997, as having been elected tothe European Parliament to fill a vacancy, or
(d) becoming a member of a local authority.
(2) An employee of the Authority, including the chief executive
officer, is immediately seconded from employment with the Auth-ority on—
(a) being nominated as a member of Seanad E ´ireann,
(b) being elected as a member of either House of the
Oireachtas or of the European Parliament, or
(c) being regarded, pursuant to section 19 of the European
Parliament Elections Act 1997, as having been elected tothe European Parliament to fill a vacancy.
(3) No remuneration or allowances are payable by the Authority
for the secondment period to a person seconded under subsection (2)
from employment and the secondment period is not to be counted asservice with the Authority for the purposes of any superannuationbenefit.
(4) In relation to a person seconded under subsection (2) from
employment, the secondment period begins on the occurrence of therelevant event referred to in that subsection and ends when the per-son ceases to be a member of either House of the Oireachtas or ofthe European Parliament.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
PART 12
Dissolution of Specified Bodies, Transfer of Employees,
Property and Liabilities to the Authority
86.—In this Part “specified bodies” means—
(a) the Irish Health Services Accreditation Board, and
(b) the Interim Health Information and Quality Authority.
87.—The specified bodies are dissolved by this Act on the estab-
lishment day.
88.—(1) In this section and section 90 —
“previous service” means service with a specified body before the
applicable transfer day;
“recognised trade union or association of employees” means—
(a) a trade union, or
(b) an association of employees,
recognised by the Authority for the purposes of negotiations that are
concerned with the terms and conditions of employment;
“terms and conditions of employment” includes terms and conditions
in respect of tenure of office, remuneration and related matters.
(2) On the establishment day each person who, immediately
before that day, was an employee of a specified body—
(a) is transferred to the Authority, and
(b) becomes an employee of the Authority.
(3) Except in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated
with a recognised trade union or association of employees, a persontransferred under this section is entitled while in the employment ofthe Authority to terms and conditions of employment no less favour-able than those to which the person was entitled immediately beforethe establishment day.
(4) Until the terms and conditions of employment to which a per-
son transferred under this section was entitled immediately beforethe establishment day are varied by the Authority after consultingand reaching a collective agreement with the recognised trade unionor association of employees concerned, the terms and conditions con-tinue to apply to the person in the employment of the Authority.
(5) The previous service of a person transferred to the Authority
under this section is to be counted as service for the purposes of, butsubject to, any exceptions or exclusions in the following Acts:
(a) the Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003;
(b) the Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001;
57Specified bodies.
Dissolution of
specified bodies.
Transfer of
employees ofspecified bodies toAuthority.Pt.12 S.88
Transfer of staff of
Minister toAuthority.
58[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(c) the Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act
2003;
(d) the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997;
(e) the Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005;
(f) the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005;
(g) the Maternity Protection Act 1994;
(h) the Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006;
(i) the Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005;
(j) the Carer’s Leave Act 2001.
89.—(1) In this section “recognised trade union or staff associ-
ation” means one recognised by the Minister for the purposes ofnegotiations about either or both of the following:
(a) the transfer of staff to the Authority;
(b) the remuneration, conditions of employment or working
conditions of staff.
(2) On the establishment day, every person who immediately
before that day was an officer of the Minister and who is designatedby the Minister for the purpose of this section—
(a) is transferred to the Authority, and
(b) becomes an employee of the Authority.
(3) Except in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated
with any recognised trade union or staff association concerned, aperson who is transferred in accordance with subsection (2) to the
staff of the Authority shall not, while in the service of theAuthority—
(a) receive a lesser scale of pay than the scale of pay to which
he or she was entitled, or
(b) be made subject to less beneficial terms and conditions of
service, including but not limited to those relating toterms of office, than the terms and conditions of serviceto which he or she was subject immediately before thetransfer.
(4) In relation to persons transferred in accordance with subsec-
tion (2) to become an employee of the Authority, previous service
in the civil service shall be reckonable for the purposes of, but subjectto any exceptions or exclusions in the—
(a) Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003,
(b) Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001,
(c) Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act 2003,
(d) Organisation of Working Time Act 1997,[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(e) Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005,
(f) Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005,
(g) Maternity Protection Act 1994,
(h) Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006,
(i) Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005, and
(j) Carer’s Leave Act 2001.
90.—(1) The chief executive officer of the Executive, in consul-
tation with the Authority, may designate employees of the Executivefor transfer to the Authority.
(2) Any employee of the Executive transferred to the Authority
under this section becomes an employee of the Authority.
(3) Except in accordance with a collective agreement negotiated
with a recognised trade union or association of employees, a persontransferred under this section is entitled, while in the employment ofthe Authority, to terms and conditions of employment no less favour-able than those to which the person was entitled immediately beforethe date of his or her transfer to the Authority.
(4) Until the terms and conditions of employment to which a per-
son transferred under this section was entitled immediately beforehis or her transfer to the Authority are varied by the Authority afterconsulting and reaching a collective agreement with the recognisedtrade union or association of employees concerned, they continue toapply to the person transferred in the employment of the Authority.
(5) The previous service of a person transferred under this section
is to be counted as service for the purposes of, but subject to anyexceptions or exclusions in, the following Acts:
(a) the Redundancy Payments Acts 1967 to 2003;
(b) the Protection of Employees (Part-Time Work) Act 2001;
(c) the Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act
2003;
(d) the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997;
(e) the Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Acts 1973
to 2005;
(f) the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005;
(g) the Maternity Protection Act 1994;
(h) the Parental Leave Acts 1998 and 2006;
(i) the Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005;
(j) the Carer’s Leave Act 2001.
59Pt.12 S.89
Transfer of
employees ofExecutive toAuthority.Pt.12
Transfer of pension
liabilities relating toformer employeesof specified bodies.
Transfer of
property andliabilities toAuthority.
Preservation of
contracts, etc., andadaptation ofreferences.
Records of specified
bodies.
Pending legal
proceedings.
60[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
91.—The pension payments and other superannuation liabilities of
each specified body in respect of its former employees become onthe establishment day the liabilities of the Authority.
92.—(1) On the establishment day, all land that, immediately
before that day, was vested in a specified body and all rights, powersand privileges relating to or connected with that land are transferredto and vested in the Authority without conveyance or assignment.
(2) On the establishment day, all property other than land that,
immediately before that day, was the property of a specified body istransferred to and vested in the Authority without any assignment.
(3) All rights and liabilities of a specified body arising by virtue
of any contract or commitment (express or implied) entered into bythat body before the establishment day, and in effect immediatelybefore that day, are on the establishment day transferred to theAuthority.
(4) Each right and liability transferred under this section and
section 91 may, on or after its transfer, be sued on, recovered or
enforced by or against the Authority in the Authority’s own name.
(5) The Authority need not give notice of the transfer to the per-
son whose right or liability is transferred.
93.—Every contract, agreement or arrangement made between a
specified body and any other person and in force immediately beforethe establishment day—
(a) continues in force on or after that day,
(b) has effect as if the name of the Authority were substituted
in the contract, agreement or arrangement for that of thespecified body, and
(c) is enforceable by or against the Authority.
94.—(1) Each record held by a specified body immediately before
the establishment day is on that day transferred to the Authority andis, on and from that day, deemed to be held by the Authority.
(2) Any right of access, under the Freedom of Information Acts
1997 and 2003, to records that before the establishment day of theAuthority were held by a body specified under section 86 and that
are transferred to the Authority under subsection (1) is not affected
by the transfer of those records.
(3) For the purpose of section 18 of the Freedom of Information
Act 1997, any act done by the Irish Health Services AccreditationBoard before the establishment day of the Authority is deemed tohave been done by the Authority.
95.—(1) If, immediately before the establishment day, any legal
proceedings to which a specified body is a party are pending in anycourt or other tribunal—
(a) the Authority’s name shall be substituted in the pro-
ceedings for the name of the specified body, and[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(b) the proceedings shall not abate because of the substitution.
(2) Any reference to a specified body in an order made by a court
or other tribunal before the establishment day shall, on the establish-ment day, be construed as a reference to the Authority.
96.—(1) The Authority shall prepare in accordance with the
accounting standards specified by the Minister for the purposes ofsection 35 and in respect of the period specified in subsection (3) of
this section, final accounts for each body dissolved under section 87 .
(2) The Authority shall submit the final accounts to the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor General for audit not later than 3 months after theestablishment day.
(3) For the purpose of subsection (1) , the Minister may specify a
period that is longer or shorter than a financial year of the bodyconcerned.
97.—(1) The Authority shall prepare a final annual report for
each of the specified bodies dissolved under section 87 and submit
the report to the Minister not later than 6 months after the establish-ment day.
(2) Section 37(4) and (5)applies in relation to a final annual
report prepared under this section.
PART 13
Regulations
98.—(1) The Minister may make regulations that the Minister
considers necessary or expedient for purposes under this Act.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) , the Minister
may make regulations—
(a) for any purpose in relation to which regulations are pro-
vided for in this Act,
(b) prescribing any matter or thing referred to in this Act as
prescribed or to be prescribed,
(c) generally for the purpose of giving effect to this Act, and
(d) specifying a body established under the Health (Corporate
Bodies) Act 1961 and making applicable to the specifiedbody one or more of the functions of the Authority undersection 8 .
(3) A regulation under this section may contain consequential,
supplementary and ancillary provisions as the Minister considersnecessary or expedient.
(4) The Minister may—
(a) make orders for any matter in relation to which orders are
provided for in this Act, and
61Pt.12 S.95
Final accounts of
specified bodies.
Final reports of
specified bodies.
Regulations and
orders.Pt.13 S.98
Regulations
governingregistration underthis Act.
Regulations
respectingprocedures forsetting standards.
Regulations
respectingdesignated centres.
62[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(b) amend or revoke any such order other than an order under
section 3 or4.
(5) A fee prescribed under this Part may be recovered summarily
as a civil debt, without prejudice to any other method of recovery.
99.—Without limiting the generality of section 98 , the Minister
may make regulations governing the registration of persons underthis Act in respect of designated centres, including but not limitedto regulations—
(a) respecting the making of applications for registration,
(b) prescribing the contents of certificates of registration,
(c) respecting the giving of notice by a registered provider, in
respect of a designated centre, of any intended change inthe identity of the person carrying on or managing thedesignated centre,
(d) respecting the giving of notice by a registered provider,
in respect of a designated centre which is carried on ormanaged by a body corporate, of changes in the owner-ship of the body corporate or the identity of its officers,
(e) prescribing an annual fee payable by a registered provider
at such a time as may be prescribed, and
(f) prescribing the notice to be given by a registered provider
of a designated centre of intention to cease to carry onits business and close the designated centre.
100.—Without limiting the generality of section 98 , the Minister
may make regulations respecting procedures to be followed by theAuthority in setting standards under section 8(1) including but not
limited to regulations respecting—
(a) publication of any proposed standards,
(b) consultations in relation to the standards,
(c) the consultation period, and
(d) the publication of the standards after their approval by
the Minister.
101.—(1) Without limiting the generality of section 98 for the pur-
pose of ensuring proper standards in relation to designated centres,the Minister—
(a) shall make regulations as the Minister thinks appropriate,
and
(b) may make different regulations for different purposes and
for different categories of designated centres.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) , regulations
under this section may provide as respects one or more of thefollowing:[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) the maintenance, care, welfare and well-being of persons
resident in a designated centre;
(b) the numbers, qualifications and availability of persons
employed in a designated centre;
(c) the design, maintenance, repair, cleaning and cleanliness,
ventilation, heating and lighting of a designated centre;
(d) the accommodation (including the amount of space in bed-
rooms and wards, the washing facilities and the sanitaryconveniences) provided in a designated centre;
(e) the food provided for persons while resident in a desig-
nated centre;
(f) the records to be kept in a designated centre;
(g) the effecting by registered providers of designated centres
of contracts of insurance against injury to persons resi-dent in them;
(h) the management and control of the operations of a desig-
nated centre;
(i) the notification of incidents occurring in designated
centres;
(j) the giving of notice by the registered provider of periods
during which—
(i) the registered provider, or
(ii) the manager, if the registered provider is not the man-
ager of the designated centre,
proposes to be absent from the designated centre, and
specifying the information to be supplied in the notice;
(k) adequate arrangements for the running of a designated
centre during a period when the manager is absent fromit.
(3) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) , regulations
under this section—
(a) may, subject to any regulations made under Part 9 of the
Health Act 2004, require registered providers—
(i) to make adequate arrangements for dealing with com-
plaints made by or on behalf of persons seeking orreceiving any of the services provided through thedesignated centres, and
(ii) to publicise the arrangements,
(b) may prescribe for specified provisions of this Act to apply
with prescribed modifications, if any, in cases where aperson is appointed by or under the law to take chargeof a designated centre in place of its registered provider,
63Pt.13 S.101Pt.13 S.101
Laying of
regulations andorders beforeHouses ofOireachtas.
Protection of
disclosures ofinformation.
64[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(c) may provide for a designated centre referred to in para-
graph (b) to be carried on for a prescribed period by a
person who is not registered in respect of it, and
(d) may include provision for the prescribed period to be
extended by a further period the chief inspector mayallow.
102.—(1) The Minister shall ensure that every regulation and
every order made by the Minister under this Act other than an orderunder section 3 or4is laid before each House of the Oireachtas.
(2) Either House of the Oireachtas, by a resolution passed within
21 sitting days after the day on which a regulation or order is laidbefore it under this section, may annul the regulation or order.
(3) The annulment of a regulation or order under subsection (2)
takes effect immediately on the passing of the resolution concerned,but does not affect the validity of anything done under the regulationor order before the passing of the resolution.
PART 14
Protection of Disclosures of Information
103.—(1) The Health Act 2004 is amended by inserting the fol-
lowing Part after Part 9:
“PART 9A
Protected Disclosures of Information
Definition of
expressions inthis Part.55A.—In this Part and Schedule 2A:
‘actions’ means anything done or omitted to be
done;
‘authorised person’ means, unless otherwise speci-
fied, a person appointed in accordance withsection 55H(3);
‘chief inspector’ means the person who is
appointed to the Office of the Chief Inspector ofSocial Services in accordance with section 40 of the
Health Act 2007 ;
‘designated centre’ means a designated centre as
defined in section 2(1) of the Health Act 2007 ;
‘employee’ means a person who has entered into
or works under (or, where the employment hasceased, had entered into or worked under) a con-tract of employment with or is (or was) placed forthe purpose of vocational training with any of thefollowing:
(a) the Executive;
(b) another person providing a service
similar to a service provided by the[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
Executive who employs or has a con-
tractual arrangement with a personregistered with a professional regulat-ory body;
(c) a service provider;
(d) any other person receiving assistance in
accordance with section 39 of this Actor section 10 of the Child Care Act1991;
(e) a designated centre other than a desig-
nated centre operated by a relevantbody;
(f) a mental health service other than a
mental health service operated by arelevant body;
(g) a body established under the Health
(Corporate Bodies) Act 1961; or
(h) any other person who provides a service
for the purpose of providing staff toany of the persons or bodies referredto in paragraphs ( a)t o( g);
‘employer’, in relation to an employee, means a
person or body (including a service provider ordesignated centre or mental health service) listedin the definition of ‘employee’;
‘Health Information and Quality Authority’
means the body established in accordance withsection 6 of the Health Act 2007 ;
‘mental health services’ means mental health
services as defined in section 2(1) of the MentalHealth Act 2001;
‘Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland’ means the
body constituted in accordance with section 4 ofthe Pharmacy Act (Ireland) 1875;
‘professional regulatory body’ means—
(a) an Bord Altranais,
(b) the Dental Council,
(c) the Health and Social Care Pro-
fessionals Council,
(d) the Medical Council, or
(e) the Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland;
‘relevant body’ means—
(a) the Executive,
(b) a service provider,
65Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
66[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(c) any other person who has received or is
receiving assistance in accordance withsection 39 of this Act or section 10 ofthe Child Care Act 1991, or
(d) a body established under the Health
(Corporate Bodies) Act 1961;
‘Scheduled body’ means a body referred to in
Schedule 2A.
Protected
disclosure ofinformation byan employeeof a relevantbody.55B.—Where an employee of a relevant body
makes, in good faith, a disclosure to an authorisedperson and the employee has reasonable groundsfor believing that it will show one or more of thefollowing:
(a) that the health or welfare of a person
who is receiving a health or personalsocial service in accordance with thisAct has been, is or is likely to be atrisk;
(b) that the actions of any person employed
by or acting on behalf of the relevantbody has posed, is posing or is likely topose a risk to the health or welfare ofthe public;
(c) that the relevant body or a person
employed by or acting on behalf of therelevant body failed, is failing or islikely to fail to comply with any legalobligation to which the relevant bodyor person is subject in the performanceof the relevant body’s or person’sfunctions;
(d) that the conduct of the relevant body or
of a person employed by or acting onbehalf of the relevant body has led, isleading or is likely to lead to a misuseor substantial waste of public funds;
(e) that evidence of any matter falling
within any of paragraphs ( a)t o( d) has
been, is being or is likely to be deliber-ately concealed or destroyed;
the disclosure shall be a protected disclosure
under this Act.
Protected
disclosure ofinformation byan employeeof a designatedcentre.55C.—Where an employee of a person carrying
on the business of a designated centre other thana centre operated by a relevant body makes, ingood faith, a disclosure to the chief inspector andthe employee has reasonable grounds for believingthat the disclosure will show one or more of thefollowing:
(a) that the actions of any person employed
by or acting on behalf of a personcarrying on the business of a desig-nated centre has posed, is posing or is[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
likely to pose a risk to the health or
welfare of a resident of the centre;
(b) that the person carrying on the business
of a designated centre has failed, is fail-ing or is likely to fail to comply withany of the following which are applic-able to the designated centre:
(i) a provision of regulations made
under the Health Act 2007 ;
(ii) a standard made under the Health
Act 2007 ;
(iii) any other statutory obligation;
(c) that evidence of any matter falling
within either of paragraphs ( a) and ( b)
has been, is being or is likely to bedeliberately concealed or destroyed;
the disclosure shall be a protected disclosure
under this Act.
Protected
disclosure ofinformation byan employeeof a mentalhealth serviceprovider.55D.—Where an employee of a person provid-
ing mental health services other than a relevantbody makes, in good faith, a disclosure to the
Mental Health Commission or the Inspector ofMental Health Services, and the employee hasreasonable grounds for believing that the disclos-ure will show one or more of the following:
(a) that the actions of any person employed
by or acting on behalf of the personproviding the services has posed, isposing or is likely to pose a risk to thehealth or welfare of a person receivingthe service;
(b) that a person providing the services has
failed, is failing or is likely to fail tocomply with any of the following whichare applicable to the person:
(i) a provision of the Mental Health
Acts 1945 to 2001;
(ii) a provision of regulations made
under those Acts;
(iii) any other statutory obligation;
(c) that evidence of any matter falling
within either of paragraphs ( a) and ( b)
has been, is being or is likely to bedeliberately concealed or destroyed;
the disclosure shall be a protected disclosure
under this Act.
67Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
68[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
Protected
disclosure ofinformation inrelation toregulatedprofessions.55E.—Where a person makes, in good faith, a
disclosure to a professional regulatory body, whichthe person has reasonable grounds for believingwill show that the actions of any person, the exer-cise of whose profession requires him or her to beregistered with a professional regulatory body, hasposed, is posing or is likely to pose a risk to thehealth or welfare of the public, the disclosure shallbe a protected disclosure under this Act.
Applications
and complaintsabout healthprofessionalsto beprotecteddisclosures.55F.—(1) An application in accordance with—
(a) section 45 of the Medical Practitioners
Act 1978,
(b) section 38 of the Dentists Act 1985,
(c) section 38 of the Nurses Act 1985,
is a protected disclosure under this Act.
(2) A complaint under section 52 of the Health
and Social Care Professionals Act 2005 is a pro-tected disclosure under this Act.
Protected
disclosure ofinformation:monitoring,investigationsandinspections.55G.—Where a person makes, in good faith, a
disclosure to—
(a) an authorised person appointed by the
Health Information and Quality Auth-ority in accordance with section 70 of
theHealth Act 2007 to—
(i) monitor compliance with standards
in accordance with section 8(1)(c)
of the Health Act 2007 ,o r
(ii) undertake an investigation under
section 9 of the Health Act 2007 ,
(b) the chief inspector who is in the course
of an inspection carried out in accord-ance with section 41 of the Health Act
2007 ,o r
(c) the Inspector of Mental Health Services
who is in the course of an inspectioncarried out in accordance with section51 of the Mental Health Act 2001,
which the person has reasonable grounds for
believing will show a risk to the health or welfareof the public, the disclosure is a protected disclos-ure under this Act.
Duty of
relevant bodyto establishprocedures.55H.—(1) The Executive shall establish pro-
cedures, applicable to the Executive, service pro-viders and any other person who has received oris receiving assistance in accordance with section39 of this Act or section 10 of the Child Care Act1991—[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(a) to facilitate the making of protected dis-
closures, and
(b) for the investigation of any matter
which is the subject matter of a pro-tected disclosure.
(2) A body established under the Health
(Corporate Bodies) Act 1961 which is not a serviceprovider shall establish procedures—
(a) to facilitate the making of protected dis-
closures, and
(b) for the investigation of any matter
which is the subject matter of a pro-tected disclosure.
(3) The Executive, or as the case may be, a
body referred to in subsection (2), shall appoint aperson (the ‘authorised person’) to whom pro-tected disclosures may be made.
(4) A service provider may, with the agreement
of the Executive, establish procedures for the pur-poses set out in paragraphs ( a) and ( b) of subsec-
tion (1) so far as relating to matters within theremit of the service provider.
(5) The Executive may agree under subsection
(4) only if satisfied that the procedures beingestablished under that subsection are of a standardequivalent to those established, or which it wouldotherwise have established, under subsection (1).
(6) Procedures established under subsection (4)
are in place of those established, or which theExecutive would have established, under subsec-tion (1), so far as applicable to the serviceprovider.
(7) Where a body established under the Health
(Corporate Bodies) Act 1961 is a service provider,the provisions of subsections (1), (4), (5) and (6)shall apply to the body.
(8) The Executive or a body referred to in sub-
section (2) shall, before establishing proceduresunder this section—
(a) submit a draft of the proposed pro-
cedures to the Data Protection Com-missioner for his or her opinion as towhether any provision of the pro-cedures would, if given effect, be likelyto result in a contravention of the DataProtection Acts 1988 and 2003, and
(b) request that the opinion be given in
writing to the Executive, or as the casemay be, the body referred to in subsec-tion (2) before the date specified inthe request.
69Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
70[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(9) If, before that date, the Data Protection
Commissioner provides a written opinion that aprovision of the draft procedures would, if giveneffect, be likely to have the results referred to insubsection (8)( a), the Executive, or as the case
may be, the body referred to in subsection (2) shallhave regard to that opinion in its further deliber-ations on the draft procedures.
Adherence to
proceduresgoverningprotecteddisclosure ofinformation tobe a conditionofarrangementsmade by theExecutive.55I.—(1) It is a condition of any arrangement
under section 38 or of assistance given undersection 39 of this Act or section 10 of the ChildCare Act 1991 that a service provider or personreceiving assistance will—
(a) adhere to the procedures established by
the Executive in accordance withsection 55H(1), or
(b) where procedures have been established
by the service provider under section55H(4), adhere to those procedures.
(2) The Executive may exercise any rights or
remedies available to it by virtue of an arrange-ment or the giving of assistance referred to in sub-section (1) if the service provider or person receiv-ing assistance, as the case may be, is in breach ofthat subsection.
Duties in
respect ofprotecteddisclosures.55J.—(1) Where a protected disclosure is made
to an authorised person, the authorised personshall investigate the subject matter of thedisclosure.
(2) An authorised person may refer that subject
matter or any part of it to an appropriate Sched-uled body or a professional regulatory body or,where the authorised person believes that a crimi-nal offence has been committed, to the GardaSı´ocha´na.
(3) An authorised person may inform a person
in charge of the body to whom the disclosurerelates of the subject matter of the disclosure.
(4) Notwithstanding a referral under subsection
(2), the authorised person may investigate the sub-ject matter if the authorised person or the personin charge of the body to which the disclosurerelates considers it appropriate to do so.
(5) The person in charge of the body to whom
the disclosure relates may, with the consent of theauthorised person, appoint another person toinvestigate the subject matter.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(6) If, at any time during an investigation, the
authorised person believes the disclosure is false,misleading, frivolous or vexatious, he or she maycease the investigation.
Disclosure to a
Scheduledbody.55K.—(1) An employee of a relevant body may
make a protected disclosure only in accordancewith—
(a) sections 55E, 55F or 55G, or
(b) the procedures established under
section 55H.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), an
employee of a relevant body may make a disclos-ure to a Scheduled body if the employee hasreasonable grounds to believe—
(a) that the disclosure is justified by reason
of the urgency of the matter, or
(b) there has been no investigation of the
matter, or if an investigation has takenplace, there has been no action orrecommended action on the subjectmatter of the disclosure.
Protection
from civilliability ofpersons whohave made aprotecteddisclosure.55L.—(1) A person is not liable in damages in
consequence of a protected disclosure.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of
a person who makes a disclosure knowing it to beor reckless as to whether it is false, misleading,frivolous or vexatious or who, in connection witha disclosure, furnishes information that the personknows to be false or misleading.
(3) The reference in subsection (1) to liability
in damages shall include a reference to any otherform of relief.
Protection of
employeesfrompenalisationfor havingmade aprotecteddisclosure.55M.—(1) An employer shall not penalise an
employee for making a protected disclosure.
(2) A contravention of subsection (1) is a
ground of complaint by an employee to a rightscommissioner.
(3) In proceedings before a rights com-
missioner or the Labour Court in relation to acomplaint of a contravention of subsection (1), itshall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved,that the disclosure was a protected disclosure.
(4) If the contravention of subsection (1) was a
dismissal of the employee within the meaning ofthe Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2005, reliefmay not be granted to the employee both underthis section and under those Acts.
71Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
72[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(5) A rights commissioner hearing a complaint
under this section shall—
(a) give the parties an opportunity to be
heard and to present any evidence rel-evant to the complaint,
(b) give a decision in writing, and
(c) communicate it to the parties.
(6) A decision of a rights commissioner under
subsection (5) shall do one or more of thefollowing:
(a) declare that the complaint was or, as the
case may be, was not well founded;
(b) require the employer to comply with
subsection (1) and to take specifiedsteps;
(c) order the employer to pay to the
employee compensation of suchamount (if any) as is just and equitablehaving regard to all the circumstances.
(7) A rights commissioner shall not entertain a
complaint under this section unless it is presentedto him or her within the period of 12 monthsbeginning on the date of the contravention towhich the complaint relates or (in a case where therights commissioner is satisfied that exceptionalcircumstances prevented the presentation of thecomplaint within that period) such further period,not exceeding 6 months from the expiration of theperiod of 12 months, as the rights commissionerconsiders reasonable.
(8) ( a) A complaint under this section shall be
presented to a rights commissioner bygiving notice of it in writing to him orher and the notice shall contain suchparticulars and be in such form as maybe specified from time to time by theMinister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment after consulting the Mini-ster for Health and Children.
(b) A copy of a notice under paragraph ( a)
shall be given to the employer by therights commissioner.
(9) Proceedings under this section before a
rights commissioner shall be conducted otherwisethan in public.
(10) A rights commissioner shall furnish the
Labour Court with a copy of any decision givenby the commissioner under this section.
(11) A party to proceedings under this section
before a rights commissioner may appeal to the[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
Labour Court from a decision of the rights com-
missioner and, on an appeal, the Labour Courtshall—
(a) give the parties an opportunity to be
heard by it and to present to it any evi-dence relevant to the appeal,
(b) make a determination in writing in
relation to the appeal affirming, vary-ing or setting aside the decision, and
(c) communicate the determination to the
parties.
(12) ( a) An appeal under this section shall be
initiated by the giving, by the partyappealing, within 6 weeks of the dateon which the decision to which itrelates was communicated to thatparty, of a notice in writing to theLabour Court under subsection (13)and stating the intention of that partyto appeal.
(b) A copy of a notice under paragraph ( a)
shall be given by the Labour Court tothe other party as soon as practicableafter the receipt of the notice by theLabour Court.
(13) The following matters, or the procedures
to be followed in relation to those matters, shallbe determined by the Labour Court, namely:
(a) the procedure in relation to the
initiation and the hearing by theLabour Court of appeals under thissection;
(b) the times and places of hearings of
such appeals;
(c) the representation of the parties to
such appeals;
(d) the publication and notification of
determinations of the Labour Court;
(e) the particulars to be contained in a
notice under subsections (12) and (15);
(f) any matters consequential on, or inci-
dental to, the matters referred to inparagraphs ( a)t o( e).
(14) ( a) The Minister for Enterprise, Trade and
Employment, after consulting theMinister for Health and Children, may,at the request of the Labour Court,refer a point of law arising in pro-ceedings under this Part before it tothe High Court for determination.
73Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
74[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
(b) A party to proceedings before the
Labour Court may appeal to the HighCourt from a determination of theLabour Court on a point of law.
(c) The determination of the High Court
under this subsection is final andconclusive.
(15) ( a) Where a decision of a rights com-
missioner under subsection (6)( b)o r
(c) has not been implemented by the
employer in accordance with its terms,the time for bringing an appeal againstthe decision has expired and no suchappeal has been brought, the employeemay bring the complaint before theLabour Court and the Labour Courtshall, without hearing the employer orany evidence (other than in relation tothe matters), make a determination tothe like effect as the decision.
(b) The bringing of a complaint before the
Labour Court by virtue of this subsec-tion shall be effected by giving to theLabour Court a notice in writing con-taining such particulars (if any) as maybe determined by the Labour Court.
(16) Proceedings under this section before the
Labour Court shall be heard otherwise than inpublic.
(17) The Labour Court shall publish, in a man-
ner it considers appropriate, particulars of anydetermination made by it under paragraphs ( a),
(b), (c), (e)o r( f) of subsection (13) (not being a
determination as respects a particular appealunder this section) or subsection (15)( b).
Proceedings
before LabourCourt.55N.—(1) The Labour Court shall, on the hear-
ing of any matter referred to it under this Part,have power to take evidence on oath and for thatpurpose may cause oaths to be administered topersons attending as witnesses at the hearing.
(2) Any person who, upon examination on oath
authorised under this section, wilfully and cor-ruptly gives false evidence or wilfully and cor-ruptly swears anything which is false is guilty of anoffence and, on conviction, is liable to the penal-ties for wilful and corrupt perjury.
(3) The Labour Court may, by giving notice in
that behalf in writing to any person, require theperson to attend at such time and place as is speci-fied in the notice to give evidence in relation toany matter referred to the Labour Court underthis section or to produce any documents in his orher possession, custody or control which relate toany such matter.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(4) A notice under subsection (3) may be given
either by delivering it to the person to whom itrelates or by sending it by post in a prepaid regis-tered letter addressed to the person at the addressat which he or she ordinarily resides.
(5) A person to whom a notice under subsec-
tion (3) has been given and who refuses or wilfullyneglects to attend in accordance with the notice orwho, having so attended, refuses to give evidenceor refuses or wilfully fails to produce any docu-ment to which the notice relates is guilty of anoffence and is liable on summary conviction to afine not exceeding \3,000.
Enforcement
ofdeterminationsof LabourCourt.55O.—(1) ( a) If an employer fails to carry out in
accordance with its terms a relevantdetermination of the Labour Courtunder section 55M within 6 weeks fromthe date on which the determination iscommunicated to the parties, the Cir-cuit Court shall, on application to it inthat behalf by—
(i) the employee,
(ii) with the consent of the employee,
any trade union of which theemployee is a member, or
(iii) the Minister for Enterprise, Trade
and Employment, if that Ministerconsiders it appropriate to makean application having regard to allthe circumstances,
without hearing the employer or any
evidence (other than in relation to thematters aforesaid) make an orderdirecting the employer to carry out thedetermination in accordance with itsterms.
(b) In paragraph ( a), a ‘relevant determi-
nation’ means a determination inrelation to which, at the expiration ofthe time for bringing an appeal againstit, no such appeal has been brought, orif such an appeal has been brought, ithas been abandoned and the referenceto the date on which the determinationis communicated to the parties shall, ina case where such an appeal is aban-doned, be construed as a reference tothe date of its abandonment.
(2) The Circuit Court may, in an order under
this section relating to the payment of compen-sation, if in all the circumstances it considers itappropriate to do so, direct the employer to payto the employee interest on the compensation, atthe rate referred to in section 22 of the Courts Act1981, in respect of the whole or any part of the
75Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
76[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
period beginning 6 weeks after the date on which
the determination of the Labour Court is com-municated to the parties and ending on the dateof the order.
(3) An application under this section to the Cir-
cuit Court shall be made to the judge of the CircuitCourt for the circuit in which the employer ordi-narily resides or carries on any profession, trade,business or occupation.
Evidence of
failure toattend beforeor giveevidence orproducedocuments toLabour Court.55P.—A document purporting to be signed by
the chairman or a vice-chairman of the LabourCourt stating that—
(a) a person named in the document was,
by a notice under section 55N requiredto attend before the Labour Court ona day and at a time and place specifiedin the document, to give evidence orproduce a document,
(b) a sitting of the Labour Court was held
on that day and at that time andplace, and
(c) the person did not attend before the
Labour Court in pursuance of thenotice or, as the case may be, havingso attended, refused to give evidenceor refused or wilfully failed to producethe document,
shall, in a prosecution of the person under section
55N, be evidence of the matters so stated withoutfurther proof.
Interpretation
of ‘penalise’.55Q.—(1) In this Part, ‘penalise’ includes any
act or omission by an employer or a person actingon behalf of an employer that affects an employeeto his or her detriment with respect to any term orcondition of his or her employment and which isconsequent upon a protected disclosure by theemployee.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) but with-
out prejudice to its generality, penalisationincludes—
(a) suspension, lay-off or dismissal
(including a dismissal within the mean-ing of the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977
to 2005), or the threat of suspension,lay-off or dismissal,
(b) demotion or loss of opportunity for
promotion,
(c) transfer of duties, change of location of
place of work, reduction in wages or achange in working hours,[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
(d) imposition of any discipline, reprimand
or other penalty (including a financialpenalty),
(e) coercion, intimidation or harassment,
(f) injury, damage or loss, and
(g) threats of reprisal.
(3) Paragraph ( c) of subsection (2) shall not be
construed in a manner which prevents anemployer from ensuring that the business of thebody concerned is carried on in an efficient andeffective manner.
Continuity of
employer’sbusiness.55R.—References in this Part to an employer
shall be construed, in a case where ownership ofthe business of the employer changes after thecontravention to which the complaint relatesoccurred, as references to the person who, by vir-tue of the change, becomes entitled to ownershipof the business.
Making false
reports.55S.—(1) A person who makes a disclosure
which the person knows or reasonably ought toknow to be false is guilty of an offence.
(2) A person guilty of an offence under this
section is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months orto both,
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \50,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 3 yearsor to both.
(3) Notwithstanding section 10(4) of the Petty
Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851, summary proceedingsfor an offence under this Act may be institutedwithin 2 years from the date on which the offencewas committed or, if later, 2 years from the dateon which evidence that, in the opinion of amember of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, is sufficient to jus-
tify the bringing of the proceedings.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) of this
section, a certificate signed by a Superintendent ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na as to the date on which the
evidence referred to in that subsection relating tothe offence concerned came to his or her know-ledge is prima facie evidence thereof and in any
legal proceedings a document purporting to be acertificate issued for the purpose of this subsectionand to be so signed is deemed to be so signed andshall be admitted as evidence without proof of thesignature of the Superintendent purporting to signthe certificate.
77Pt.14 S.103Pt.14 S.103
Repeals and
revocations.
Amendment to
other Acts.
78[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
Saver. 55T.—This Part is without prejudice to the pro-
visions of the Protections for Persons ReportingChild Abuse Act 1998.”.
(2) The Health Act 2004 is further amended—
(a) by deleting “and” from immediately after paragraph ( e)o f
section 35(1) and inserting after that paragraph thefollowing:
“(f) procedures established under section 55H, and”,
and
(b) by inserting after Schedule 2 the following Schedule:
“SCHEDULE 2A
Bodies and office-holders referred to in Part 9Aa s
Scheduled Bodies
Adoption BoardChief InspectorComptroller and Auditor GeneralHealth Information and Quality AuthorityInspector of Mental Health ServicesIrish Medicines BoardMental Health Commission”.
PART 15
Consequential and Minor Amendments to Other Acts
104.—(1) Each Act specified in the second column of Part 1 of
Schedule 1 is repealed to the extent specified in the third column,
but the repeal does not affect any notice or certificate given underthe repealed Act and such notice or certificate has effect as if givenunder this Act.
(2) Each order specified in the second column of Part 2 ofSched-
ule 1 is revoked to the extent specified in the third column.
(3) Each order, regulation and rule that was made under a pro-
vision of an enactment repealed or revoked by this Act and that wasin force immediately before such repeal or revocation continues inforce under the corresponding provision, if any, of this Act, subjectto such adaptations and modifications as the Minister, by regulation,may make for the purpose of bringing any such order, regulation orrule into conformity with this Act.
105.—The Acts specified in Schedule 2 are amended as indicated
in that Schedule.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 1
Repeals and Revocations
PART 1
Acts Repealed
Number and Short Title Extent of Repeal
Year
(1) (2) (3)
No. 21 of Hospitals Federation and The whole Act.1961 Amalgamation Act 1961
No. 23 of Health (Nursing Homes) Sections 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9.1990 Act 1990
No. 17 of Child Care Act 1991 Sections 38(3) and (4) and 59 to1991 65.
PART 2
Orders Revoked
Number and Short Title Extent of Revocation
Year
(1) (2) (3)
No. 160 of Irish Health Services The whole order.2002 Accreditation Board
(Establishment) Order 2002
No. 132 of Interim Health Information The whole order.2005 and Quality Authority
(Establishment) Order 2005
79Section 104 .Section 105 .
80[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments to Other Acts
PART 1
Amendments to Child Care Act 1991
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. Section 2 ( a) In subsection (1), by adding the following definition after
the definition of “child”:
“ ‘children’s residential centre’ means an institution
for the residential care of children in the care ofthe Health Service Executive or of other childrenin need of adequate care and protection but doesnot include—
(a) an institution managed by or on behalf of
a Minister of the Government,
(b) an institution in which a majority of the
children being maintained are beingtreated for acute illnesses or are beingprovided with palliative care,
(c) an institution for the care and maintenance
of children with a disability,
(d) an institution approved in accordance with
the Mental Health Acts 1945 to 2001,
(e) a children detention school as defined in
section 3 of the Children Act 2001;”.
(b) By adding the following subsection after subsection (2):
“(3) For the purposes of the definition of ‘children’s residen-
tial centre’ in subsection (1), ‘institution’ means a home, centreor institution or part of a home, centre or institution.”.
2. Section To delete section 15 and substitute the following:
15
“15.—The Health Service Executive shall provide or
make arrangements with suitable persons for the pro-vision of suitable accommodation for the purposes ofthis Part.”.
3. Section ( a) In subsection (2)( a), by substituting “by the Office of the
23K Chief Inspector of Social Services” for “by a person
authorised in that behalf by the Minister”.
(b) In subsection (7)( f), by deleting everything after “the per-
iodical inspections of those units”.
4. Section To delete subsection (1)( b) and substitute the following:
36
“(b) by placing him or her in residential care (whether
in a children’s residential centre or in a schoolor other suitable place of residence), or”.
5. Section ( a) In subsection (1), by deleting subsection (1) and by substi-
38 tuting the following subsection:
“(1) The Health Service Executive may make
arrangements with suitable persons to ensure the pro-vision of an adequate number of residential places forchildren in its care.”.
(b) Delete subsection (2) and substitute the following:
“(2) The Health Service Executive may provide and
maintain a children’s residential centre or other prem-ises for the provision of residential care for children incare.”.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
PART 2
Amendment to Comptroller and Auditor-General
(Amendment) Act 1993
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. First After “Fire Services Council”, by substituting “Health Infor-
Schedule mation and Quality Authority” for “General Medical Services
(Payments) Board”.
PART 3
Amendments to Freedom of Information Act 1997
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. First ( a) By inserting in paragraph 1(2), “the Health Information
Schedule and Quality Authority” before “the Heritage Council”,
and
(b) in paragraph 1(2), by deleting “An Comhairle na nOspi-
de´al,” and “the Irish Health Services Accreditation
Board”.
2. Third By inserting in Part I of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (1) “39 & 40 Vict., c. 77 1876”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “39 & 40 Vict., c.
77 1876”, “Cruelty to Animals Act 1876”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Cruelty to Ani-
mals Act 1876”, “section 12C(1)”.
3. Third By inserting in Part 1 of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (1) “No. 28 of 1947”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 28 of 1947”,
“Health Act 1947” and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of “Health Act 1947”,
“section 54(3)”.
4. Third By inserting in Part I of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (1) “No. 16 of 1994”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 16 of 1994”,
“Health Insurance Act 1994”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Health
Insurance Act 1994”, “section 34(1)”.
5. Third By inserting in Part I of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (1) “No. 29 of 1998”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 29 of 1998”,
“Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act 1998”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Food Safety
Authority of Ireland Act 1998”, “section 43(1)”.
6. Third By inserting in Part I of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (1) “No. 6 of 2002”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 6 of 2002”,
“Public Health (Tobacco) Act 2002”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Public Health
(Tobacco) Act 2002”, “section 20(1)”.
81Sch. 2Sch. 2
82[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
7. Third By inserting in Part I of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (1) “No. 17 of 2006”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 17 of 2006”,
“Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Health
(Repayment Scheme) Act 2006”, “section 12(4)”.
8. Third By inserting in Part I of the Third Schedule in the appropriate
Schedule chronological place—
(a) in column (2) “ Health Act 2007 ”, and
(b) in column (3), opposite the mention of the “ Health Act
2007 ”, “section 84 ”.
9. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 288 of 1976”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 288 of 1976”,
“The European Communities (Recognition of MedicalQualifications) Regulations 1976”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The European
Communities (Recognition of Medical Qualifications)Regulations 1976”, “Article 8( b)”.
10. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 237 of 1980”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 237 of 1980”,
“The European Communities (Recognition of GeneralNursing Qualifications) Regulations 1980”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The European
Communities (Recognition of General NursingQualifications) Regulations 1980”, “Article 7( b)”.
11. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 20 of 1983”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 20 of 1983”,
“The European Communities (Recognition of Mid-wifery Nursing Qualifications) Regulations 1983”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The European
Communities (Recognition of Midwifery NursingQualifications) Regulations 1983”, “Article 8( b)”.
12. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 226 of 1993”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 226 of 1993”,
“Nursing Homes (Care and Welfare) Regulations1993”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Nursing Homes
(Care and Welfare) Regulations 1993”, “Article 20”.
13. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 279 of 1986”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 279 of 1986”,
“The Health Research Board (Establishment) Order1986”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The Health
Research Board (Establishment) Order 1986”, “Article23”.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
14. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 252 of 1994”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 252 of 1994”,
“The European Communities (Medical Devices) Regu-lations 1994”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The European
Communities (Medical Devices) Regulations 1994”,“Articles 24A and 26(1)( c)”.
15. Third
By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule— Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 253 of 1994”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 253 of 1994”,
“The European Communities (Active ImplantableMedical Devices) Regulations 1994”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The European
Communities (Active Implantable Medical Devices)Regulations 1994”, “Article 20(1)( c)”.
16. Third
By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule— Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 97 of 1997”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 97 of 1997”,
“The National Social Work Qualifications Board(Establishment) Order 1997”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The National
Social Work Qualifications Board (Establishment)Order 1997”, “Article 37”.
17. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 120 of 1997”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 120 of 1997”,
“The National Council on Ageing and Older People(Establishment) Order 1997”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The National
Council on Ageing and Older People (Establishment)Order 1997”, “Article 24”.
18. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 278 of 1997”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 278 of 1997”,
“The Women’s Health Council (Establishment) Order1997”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The Women’s
Health Council (Establishment) Order 1997”, “Article24”.
19. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule
(a) in column (1) “No. 187 of 1971”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 187 of 1971”,
“St. James Hospital Board (Establishment) Order1971”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “St. James
Hospital Board (Establishment) Order 1971”, “Article29”.
83Sch. 2Sch. 2
84[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
20. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 253 of 1999”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 253 of 1999”,
“St Luke’s Hospital Board (Establishment) Order1999”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “St Luke’s
Hospital Board (Establishment) Order 1999”,“Article25”.
21. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 376 of 1999”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 376 of 1999”,
“The National Council for the Professional Develop-ment of Nursing and Midwifery (Establishment) Order1999”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The National
Council for the Professional Development of Nursingand Midwifery (Establishment) Order 1999”, “Article25”.
22. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 109 of 2000”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 109 of 2000”,
“The Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council(Establishment) Order 2000”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “The Pre-
Hospital Emergency Care Council (Establishment)Order 2000”, “Article 35”.
23. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 304 of 2001”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 304 of 2001”,
“European Communities (In Vitro Diagnostic MedicalDevices) Regulations 2001”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “European
Communities (In Vitro Diagnostic Medical Devices)Regulations 2001”, “Articles 17(4)( c) and 20”.
24. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 446 of 2001”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 446 of 2001”,
“Crisis Pregnancy Agency (Establishment) Order2001”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “Crisis Preg-
nancy Agency (Establishment) Order 2001”, “Article24”.
25. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 179 of 2004”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 179 of 2004”,
“National Treatment Purchase Fund Board(Establishment) Order 2004”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “National Treat-
ment Purchase Fund Board (Establishment) Order2004”, “Article 16”.
26. Third By inserting in Part II of the Third Schedule—
Schedule(a) in column (1) “No. 451 of 2004”,
(b) in column (2) opposite the mention of “No. 451 of 2004”,
“National Haemophilia Council (Establishment) Order2004”, and
(c) in column (3) opposite the mention of the “National Hae-
mophilia Council (Establishment) Order 2004”, “Arti-cle 23”.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
PART 4
Amendments to Health Act 2004
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. Section 2 In subsection (1), by deleting the definition of “service pro-
vider” and substituting the following definition:
“ ‘service provider’ means a person who—
(a) enters into an arrangement under section 38 to
provide a health or personal social service onbehalf of the Executive, or
(b) is in receipt of assistance under—
(i) section 39 in an amount that exceeds an
amount prescribed for the purposes of para-graph ( b)(i) of the definition of ‘service pro-
vider’ in section 2 of the Health Act 2007, or
(ii) section 10 of the Child Care Act 1991 in an
amount that exceeds an amount prescribedfor the purposes of paragraph ( b)(ii) of the
definition of ‘service provider’ in section 2 of
theHealth Act 2007 ;”.
2. Section By adding the following section after section 5:
5A
“Expenses of the Executive.
5A.—The expenses incurred by the Executive are, with the
approval of the Minister, to such extent as may be sanctionedby the Minister for Finance, payable out of money provided bythe Oireachtas.”.
3. Section 7 In subsection (5), by deleting “and” at the end of paragraph
(d), by substituting “, and” for the full stop at the end of para-
graph ( e) and by adding the following paragraph:
“(f) any standards set by the Health Information and Quality
Authority, in so far as practicable and subject to theresources available to the Executive.”.
4. Section ( a) In subsection (3), by deleting paragraph ( b) and substitut-
38 ing the following paragraph:
“(b) submit such accounts annually for examination,
and”.
(b) After subsection (3) by inserting the following:
“(4) The Executive may make an arrangement for the
provision of a health or personal social service inaccordance with this section by seeking and accepting atender for the provision of such services.
(5) A service provider providing a service in accordance
with subsection (4) is exempt from the requirements ofsubsections (2) and (3).”.
5. Section In subsection (2) after the words “The Minister may” delete
41 the words “by order”.
85Sch. 2Sch. 2
86[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
PART 5
Amendment to Civil Registration Act 2004
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. Section In subsection (2) delete paragraph ( c) and substitute the follow-
51 ing paragraph:
“(c) the solemnisation takes place in a place that is open to
the public, unless an tArd-Chla ´raitheoir or a superin-
tendent registrar—
(i) is satisfied on the basis of a certificate of a regis-
tered medical practitioner that one or both ofthe persons to be married is too ill to attend ata place that is open to the public, and
(ii) gives approval to the solemniser to the solemnis-
ation taking place at another place—
(I) chosen by the persons to be married, and(II) agreed to by the solemniser.”.
2. Section Insert the following subsection at the end of section 52:
52
“(4) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of a marriage sol-
emnised in the circumstances described in subparagraph (i) and(ii) of section 51(2)( c).”.
PART 6
Amendment to Disability Act 2005
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. Section By deleting “under section 5 of the Act of 2004”.
10
PART 7
Amendment to Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006
Item Provision Amendment
affected
1. Section 2 ( a) By inserting the following definition after the definition
of “act”:
“ ‘Agency’ means the National Treasury Management
Agency established by section 3 of the National Treas-ury Management Agency Act 1990;”,
and
(b) By inserting the following definitions after the definition
of “applicant”:
“ ‘Authority’ means the Irish Financial Services Regu-
latory Authority established by section 33B of the Cen-tral Bank Act 1942 (as inserted by section 26 of theCentral Bank and Financial Services Authority ofIreland Act 2003);
‘central treasury services’ means central treasury
services within the meaning of section 18 of theNational Treasury Management Agency (Amendment)Act 2000;”.
(c) In the definition of “connected person”, in paragraph ( b),
by inserting “or the county registrar concerned, as thecase requires,” after “Wards of Court”.[2007.] [ No. 23.] Health Act 2007 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
2. Section 9 ( a) In subsection (2)—
(i) by substituting the following for paragraph ( a)(ii):
“(ii) as follows:
(I) with such financial institutions as are auth-
orised by the Authority;
(II) in securities of the Government (including
savings certificates); or
(III) in securities guaranteed as to capital and
interest by the Minister for Finance,”,
(ii) in paragraph ( b), by deleting “or” at the end,
(iii) in paragraph ( c), by deleting “lodged.” and substi-
tuting “lodged, and”,
(iv) by inserting the following after paragraph ( c):
“(d) may deposit moneys held in any patient’s
private property account, unless otherwisedirected in writing by the account holder ora next friend appointed by a court, in centraltreasury services,
(e) may request the Agency to manage some or all
of the moneys in patients’ private propertyaccounts subject to such conditions as theExecutive and the Agency may agree tofrom time to time,
(f) may amend or revoke a request referred to in
paragraph ( e) (but without prejudice to the
validity of any act done pursuant to therequest before the amendment or revo-cation, as the case may be),”,
and
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (2):
“(2A) The Agency shall, by virtue of this subsection,
have all such powers as are necessary for or incidentalto the carrying out of a request referred to in subsec-tion (2)( e).”.
3. Section By deleting subsection (12) and substituting the following:
11
“(12) The Executive, in respect of moneys standing to the
credit of the Fund (other than such moneys for the time beingrequired for the purposes of making payments out of the Fundpursuant to subsection (1))—
(a) may invest such moneys—
(i) with such financial institutions as are auth-
orised by the Authority,
(ii) in securities of the Government (including
savings certificates), or
(iii) in securities guaranteed as to capital and
interest by the Minister for Finance,
or
(b) may deposit such moneys in central treasury
services.
(13) The Executive—
(a) may request the Agency to manage some or
all of the moneys standing to the credit of
87Sch. 2Sch. 2
88[No. 23.] [2007.] Health Act 2007 .
Item Provision Amendment
affected
the Fund (other than such moneys for the
time being required for the purposes of mak-ing payments out of the Fund pursuant tosubsection (1)) subject to such conditions asthe Executive and the Agency may agree tofrom time to time,
(b) may amend or revoke a request referred to in
paragraph ( a) (but without prejudice to the
validity of any act done pursuant to therequest before the amendment or revo-cation, as the case may be).
(14) The Agency shall, by virtue of this subsection, have all
such powers as are necessary for or incidental to the carryingout of a request referred to in subsection (13)( a).”.