————————
Number 1of2007
————————
HEALTH (NURSING HOMES) (AMENDMENT) ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Insertion of Part heading before section 1.
2. Amendment of section 2 of Health (Nursing Homes) Act
1990.
3. Substitution of section 7 of Health (Nursing Homes) Act
1990.
4. Insertion of Part heading before section 8.5. Insertion of Part heading before section 11.6. Substitution of section 14 of Health (Nursing Homes) Act
1990.
7. Repeal of section 3 of Health (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act 2001.
8. Amendment of Schedule 7 to Health Act 2004.9. Revocation of Nursing Homes (Subvention) Regulations
1993.
10. Amendment of section 2 of Health (Repayment Scheme)
Act 2006.
11. Amendment of Health Act 1970.12. Short title, construction, collective citation and com-
mencement.
————————2[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Finance Act 2002 2002, No. 5
Health Act 2004 2004, No. 42Health Act 1970 1970, No. 1Health Acts 1947 to 2007Health (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2001 2001, No. 14Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 1990, No. 23Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 2006, No. 17Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39————————
Number 1of2007
————————
HEALTH (NURSING HOMES) (AMENDMENT) ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND THE HEALTH (NURSING HOMES) ACT
1990 AND TO CONSEQUENTIALLY REPEAL SECTION 3OF THE HEALTH (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)ACT 2001, AMEND SCHEDULE 7 TO THE HEALTH ACT2004, REVOKE THE HEALTH (IN-PATIENT SERVICES)REGULATIONS 1993 AND THE NURSING HOMES(SUBVENTION) REGULATIONS 1993, AMEND SECTION2 OF THE HEALTH (REPAYMENT SCHEME) ACT 2006AND AMEND THE HEALTH ACT 1970.
[19th February , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—The Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 is amended by
inserting the following immediately before section 1:
“PART 1
Preliminary and General”.
2.—Section 2 of the Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 is
amended—
(a) in subsection (1)( h)—
(i) by inserting “subject to subsection (3),” before
“premises in which”, and
(ii) by deleting “(other than premises in relation to which
a payment has been made under section 7)”;
and
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (2):
“(3) No prescribed subvention within the meaning of
section 7(1) shall be paid to a dependent person main-tained in premises referred to in subsection (1)( h) unless
the premises are a registered nursing home.”.
3Insertion of Part
heading beforesection 1.
Amendment of
section 2 of Health(Nursing Homes)Act 1990.Substitution of
section 7 of Health(Nursing Homes)Act 1990.
4[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
3.—The Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 is amended by substi-
tuting the following for section 7:
“PART 2
Subventions for Dependent Persons in Nursing Homes
Interpretation
of Part 2 .7.—(1) In this Part—
‘alternative subvention’ means a higher alternative
subvention referred to in section 7C(1)( b);
‘application’ means an application under section
7A(1);
‘applicant’, in relation to an application, means the
dependent person who made the application;
‘Executive’ means the Health Service Executive;‘nursing home’ includes a nursing home in
Northern Ireland which is registered under thatlaw of, or that law applicable to, Northern Irelandthat is equivalent to this Act;
‘prescribed amount’, in relation to a provision of
this Part, means the amount prescribed in regu-lations made under section 7H in respect of thatprovision;
‘prescribed percentage’, in relation to section
7B(3)( b)(ii) or (4), means the percentage pre-
scribed in regulations made under section 7H inrespect of section 7B(3)( b)(ii) or (4), as the case
requires;
‘prescribed subvention’ means the amount of a
subvention payable under section 7C(1)( a) as pre-
scribed in section 7H(4);
‘relevant subvention’ means—
(a) a prescribed subvention, or
(b) an alternative subvention;
‘subvention’ means a payment towards the costs
of the care and maintenance of a dependent per-son in a nursing home.
(2) No provision of this Part shall operate to
prevent a personal representative (or otherrepresentative) of a dependent person who is notof full capacity from acting for or on behalf of thedependent person in relation to any matter towhich any provision of this Part relates.
Application
for prescribedsubvention.7A.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), a dependent
person may make an application to the Executivefor a prescribed subvention.[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(2) An application shall be—
(a) in writing in a form approved by the
Executive,
(b) completed in accordance with such
directions and instructions as are speci-fied in the application, and
(c) accompanied by such documents
(including statutory declarations) asare specified in the application.
(3) The Executive may refuse to consider or
further consider an application if—
(a) the application does not comply with
subsection (2), or
(b) the applicant fails to provide the Execu-
tive with such information in additionto the information provided by or withthe application as the Executive mayreasonably require to enable it todetermine the application undersection 7C(1).
(4) Where the Executive refuses under subsec-
tion (3) to consider or further consider an appli-cation, it shall, as soon as is practicable after therefusal, give the applicant notice in writing of thedecision and the reasons for the decision.
(5) Any person who knowingly gives the
Executive information which is false or misleadingin a material respect in, with, or in connectionwith, an application is guilty of an offence andliable on summary conviction to a fine notexceeding \3,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 months or both.
Assessment of
need forapplicant to bemaintained innursing homeand of meansof applicant.7B.—(1) Without prejudice to the generality of
section 7A(3) but subject to subsections (2) and(3), upon the receipt of an application the Execu-tive shall make arrangements for—
(a) the need for the applicant to be main-
tained in a nursing home to be assessedby a person (who may be an employeeof the Executive) who, in the opinionof the Executive, is suitably qualifiedto make that assessment, and a reportthereon to be provided to the Execu-tive, and
(b) the means of the applicant to be
assessed by an employee of the Execu-tive, or any person nominated in writ-ing by the Executive, and a reportthereon to be provided to theExecutive.
5S.3S.3
6[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(2) The assessment of an applicant’s need to be
maintained in a nursing home shall be made onthe basis of—
(a) the applicant’s ability to carry out the
activities of daily living, including theapplicant’s—
(i) degree of mobility,
(ii) ability to dress unaided,
(iii) ability to feed unaided,
(iv) ability to communicate,
(v) extent of orientation,
(vi) cognitive ability,
(vii) ability to bathe unaided, and
(viii) degree of continence,
(b) the family and community support
available to the applicant,
(c) the medical services the applicant is
receiving, and
(d) any other matter which affects the
applicant’s ability to care for himselfor herself.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), the financial
assessment of an applicant’s means shall be madeon the basis of—
(a) subject to paragraph ( b), all the appli-
cant’s assets and sources of incomeincluding the applicant’s—
(i) wages, salary, pension, allowances,
payments for part time and sea-sonal work, income from rentals,investments and savings and allcontributions from whomsoeverarising,
(ii) property (excluding household
chattels but, if paragraph ( b)(ii) is
applicable, including an imputedannual income equivalent to somuch of the estimated marketvalue of the principal residence ofthe applicant as is not excluded bythe operation of that paragraph),
(iii) stocks, shares and securities,
(iv) moneys on hand, in trust or lodged,
deposited or invested,[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(v) interest in any company or business
(including any farm),
(vi) interests in property,
(vii) life assurance and endowment
policies,
(viii) valuables held as investments,
(ix) any benefit or privilege, and
(x) assets (including moneys) which
have been transferred (by what-ever means) by the applicant toanother person—
(I) for no consideration,
(II) for nominal consideration, or
(III) for consideration which is sig-
nificantly less than the esti-mated market value of theasset concerned at the timethe asset was so transferred,
at any time within the 5 years immedi-
ately preceding the date on which theapplication is made,
(b) excluding—
(i) subject to subparagraph (vi), the
principal residence of the appli-cant if at the time of the appli-cation and thereafter it is continu-ously occupied by—
(I) the applicant’s spouse,
(II) a child of the applicant of less
than 21 years of age,
(III) a child of the applicant in full-
time education,
(IV) a relative of the applicant in
receipt of—
(A) disability or similar
allowance,
(B) blind person’s pension,(C) illness benefit,
(D) invalidity pension,
(E) state pension (contributory)
in any case where, before28 September 2006, the
7S.3S.3
8[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
relative would have been
entitled to invaliditypension,
(F) state pension (non-
contributory),
(G) any successor to an allow-
ance, pension or benefitreferred to in this sub-clause in any case wherethat allowance, pensionor benefit, as the casemay be, ceases to be pro-vided, or
(H) any European Union
equivalent to an allow-ance, pension or benefit,or any successor thereto,referred to in thissubclause,
or
(V) a relative of the applicant in
receipt of—
(A) state pension (con-
tributory),
(B) any successor to a pension
referred to in this sub-clause in any case wherethat pension ceases to beprovided, or
(C) any European Union
equivalent to a pension,or any successor thereto,referred to in thissubclause,
which is the relative’s sole
income,
(ii) subject to subparagraphs (v) and
(vi), if subparagraph (i) is notapplicable, 95 per cent, or the pre-scribed percentage, whichever isthe greater, of the estimatedmarket value of the principal resi-dence of the applicant as deter-mined not later than 6 monthsafter receipt of the application bythe Executive,
(iii) one-fifth of the weekly rate of—
(I) subject to clause (II), state
pension (non-contributory),[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(II) any successor to that pension
in any case where that pen-sion ceases to be provided,
and whether or not the applicant
is in receipt of that pension or anysuccessor thereto,
(iv) the first \11,000, or the prescribed
amount, whichever is the greater,of the applicant’s assets,
(v) without prejudice to the generality
of subparagraph (i), the principalresidence of the applicant in anycase where not excluding that resi-dence from falling within para-graph ( a) could reasonably give
rise to the destitution or home-lessness of a person having a closeconnection with the applicant fora period of not less than 12months immediately before theapplication was made, and
(vi) without prejudice to the generality
of subparagraph (i), the principalresidence of the applicant in anycase where the applicant has beenpaid in accordance with this Acta relevant subvention for not lessthan 3 consecutive years at anytime following the commencementof this subsection.
(4) Where an applicant is a married or
cohabiting person, subsection (3) shall be con-strued to be a financial assessment made on thebasis of 50 per cent, or the prescribed percentage,whichever is the lesser, of the combined means ofthe married couple or cohabiting couple, as thecase may be.
(5) Subject to subsection (6), the arrangements
referred to in subsection (1) may include—
(a) in relation to the assessment referred to
in subsection (2), a physical examin-ation of the applicant concerned by, asappropriate, a registered medical prac-titioner, a registered nurse, an occu-pational therapist or a charteredphysiotherapist,
(b) in relation to the assessment referred to
in subsection (3), requests for infor-mation from, and interviews with, thespouse or any child of the applicantconcerned.
(6) The arrangements referred to in subsection
(1) shall not include, in relation to the assessment
9S.3S.3
10[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
referred to in subsection (2), an inspection of the
medical records of the applicant concerned exceptsuch an inspection carried out by a registeredmedical practitioner.
(7) In subsection (3)( b)(i)(IV) and (V), ‘rela-
tive’, in relation to an applicant, means a spouse,parent, step-parent, child, step-child, grandchild,brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, uncle,aunt, nephew or niece of—
(a) the applicant, or
(b) the applicant’s spouse.
Determination
of application.7C.—(1) Subject to subsection (4) and section
7K, the Executive shall determine an application,after having had regard to the reports provided toit pursuant to section 7B(1)( a) and ( b) in respect
of the applicant, by—
(a) if it is satisfied that the applicant quali-
fies for a prescribed subvention,arranging for the prescribed subven-tion for which the applicant is qualifiedto be paid—
(i) subject to subsection (2), to the
applicant, and
(ii) for so long as the Executive
remains so satisfied,
(b) subject to subsection (6), if it is satisfied
that the applicant qualifies for a pre-scribed subvention but is also furthersatisfied that the applicant still cannot,without undue hardship, pay all or anyof the costs of the applicant’s care andmaintenance in a nursing home,arranging for a higher alternative sub-vention to be paid in lieu of the pre-scribed subvention—
(i) subject to subsection (2), to the
applicant,
(ii) beginning on such date, or the
occurrence of such event, as isspecified by the Executive, and
(iii) for so long as the Executive
remains so further satisfied,
(c) if the applicant does not fall within
paragraph ( a)o r( b), refusing the
application.
(2) The Executive may, at its discretion, effect
the payment of a relevant subvention to an appli-cant by paying the subvention to the proprietor of[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
the nursing home in which the applicant is or is to
be maintained.
(3) Where the Executive determines an appli-
cation under subsection (1), it shall, as soon as ispracticable after the determination, give notice inwriting to the applicant of the decision and thereasons for the decision.
(4) The Executive may, at its discretion, refuse
to pay a relevant subvention to an applicant—
(a) if the value of the applicant’s assets,
excluding the principal residence,exceeds \36,000 or the prescribed
amount, whichever is the greater,
(b)i f —
(i) the applicant’s principal residence
is valued at—
(I) in the case of a principal resi-
dence located in the Dublinarea, not less than \500,000
or the prescribed amount,whichever is the greater, andis not occupied as specified insection 7B(3)( b)(i),
(II) in the case of a principal resi-
dence located outside theDublin area, \365,000 or the
prescribed amount, which-ever is the greater, and is notoccupied as specified insection 7B(3)( b)(i),
and
(ii) the applicant’s annual income is not
less than \10,400 or the prescribed
amount, whichever is the greater,
or
(c) if the applicant does not fall within
paragraph ( a)o r( b) but does have an
annual income of not less than \36,000
or the prescribed amount, whichever isthe greater.
(5) Where the Executive refuses to pay a rel-
evant subvention to an applicant on a groundspecified in subsection (4), it shall, as soon as ispracticable after the decision, give notice in writ-ing to the applicant of the decision and the reasonsfor the decision.
11S.3S.3
12[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(6) The Executive shall only determine the
amounts of alternative subventions after takinginto account the resources available to pay thealternative subventions.
Review of
dependantpersons whoare paidrelevantsubventions.7D.—(1) The Executive may at any time
arrange for—
(a) a review to be done—
(i) of—
(I) the need for a dependent per-
son to whom a relevant sub-vention is paid to continue tobe maintained in a nursinghome, or
(II) the means of the dependent
person,
on the same bases as are specified
in section 7B(2) and (3),
(ii) by—
(I) where subparagraph (i)(I) is
applicable, a person (whomay be an employee of theExecutive) who, in theopinion of the Executive, issuitably qualified to do thatreview, and
(II) where subparagraph (i)(II) is
applicable, an employee ofthe Executive, or any personnominated in writing by theExecutive,
and
(b) the results of the review to be put in
writing and provided to the Executive.
(2) Subject to subsection (4), where the Execu-
tive, after having had regard to a review providedto it pursuant to subsection (1)( b), is satisfied that
the dependent person to whom the reviewrelates—
(a) is no longer qualified for the payment
of a relevant subvention, or
(b) qualifies for the payment of a different
relevant subvention than that currentlybeing paid to the person,
then the Executive shall arrange for—[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(i) if paragraph ( a) is applicable, the cess-
ation of the payment of a relevant sub-vention to the person,
(ii) if paragraph ( b) is applicable and with-
out prejudice to the generality ofsection 7C(2), the different relevantsubvention to be paid to the person.
(3) Where the Executive makes a decision
under subsection (2) in respect of a dependentperson, it shall, as soon as is practicable after thedecision is made, give notice in writing to—
(a) the person, and
(b) if section 7C(2) is applicable, to the pro-
prietor of the nursing home in whichthe person is or is to be maintained,
of the decision and the reasons for the decision.
(4) Where a decision of the Executive under
subsection (2) in respect of a dependent personmeans that—
(a) a relevant subvention will cease to be
paid to the person, or
(b) a lower relevant subvention will be paid
to the person,
then the Executive shall not implement that
decision before the expiration of 60 days after thedate on which it has given notice under subsection(3) of the decision to the person.
Appeals
againstdecisions ofExecutive, etc.7E.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person
(‘relevant person’) may appeal against a decisionof the Executive under section 7A(3), 7C(1) or (4)or 7D(2) by giving notice in writing to the Execu-tive not later than 60 days after notice of thedecision was given to the relevant person undersection 7A(4), 7C(3) or (5) or 7D(3), as the casemay be.
(2) An appeal under subsection (1) shall—
(a) be in a form approved by the Execu-
tive, and
(b) state the reasons for the appeal.
(3) Where the Executive receives an appeal
under subsection (1), it shall appoint a person(who may be an employee of the Executive) toconsider the appeal.
(4) The person appointed pursuant to subsec-
tion (2) to consider an appeal under subsection(1) shall—
13S.3S.3
14[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) comply with guidelines issued by the
Executive in respect of the procedureto be followed with respect to the con-sideration of any appeal,
(b) consider any written or oral objections
made by the appellant in support ofthe appeal,
(c) make a decision (‘relevant decision’) in
writing determining the appeal as soonas is practicable in all the circum-stances of the case, and
(d) send a copy of the relevant decision to
the relevant person and the Executivetogether with the person’s reasons forthe decision.
(5) An appeal shall lie to the High Court by the
relevant person in respect of the relevant decisionand the Executive may cross-appeal the appeal.
(6) An appeal under subsection (5) shall be
heard otherwise than in public at the request ofthe relevant person.
(7) A decision of the High Court on an appeal
under subsection (5) shall be final except that, byleave of the Court, an appeal from the decisionshall lie to the Supreme Court on a specified ques-tion of law.
Proprietor of
nursing hometo notifyExecutive ofdeath ordischarge ofdependentperson who ispaid relevantsubvention,etc.7F.—(1) Where a dependent person who is
paid a relevant subvention—
(a) dies in a nursing home,
(b) is discharged from a nursing home, or
(c) otherwise permanently departs from a
nursing home,
the proprietor of the nursing home shall, not later
than 48 hours after the date of the person’s death,discharge, or other departure, as the case may be,give notice in writing to the Executive of the nameof the person and of that date.
(2) Where the proprietor of a nursing home
proposes to discharge from the nursing home adependent person who is paid a relevant subven-tion, the proprietor shall, not later than 14 daysbefore the proposed date of discharge, give noticein writing to the Executive of—
(a) the name of the person and of the pro-
posed date of discharge, and
(b) the reasons for the discharge.[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(3) The proprietor of a nursing home who,
without reasonable excuse, contravenes subsection(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence and liable on sum-mary conviction to a fine not exceeding \1,000.
(4) Where a dependent person maintained in a
nursing home—
(a) starts to be paid a relevant subvention,
or
(b) ceases to be paid a relevant subvention,
then the Executive shall, as soon as is practicable
thereafter, give notice in writing to the proprietorof the nursing home of that start of payment, orcessation of payment, as the case may be.
Recovery of
payment ofrelevantsubventionprocuredthrough fraudormisrepresentation,etc.7G.—Where it comes to the knowledge of the
Executive that—
(a) all or part of the payment of a relevant
subvention to a dependent person hasbeen procured through fraud or mis-representation, or
(b) there has been an overpayment of a rel-
evant subvention to, or in respect of, adependent person,
then the amount of that payment so procured, or
of that overpayment, as the case may be, shall berepayable to the Executive on demand and, if notso repaid, the Executive may recover the amount,as a simple contract debt in any court of com-petent jurisdiction, from the dependent person towhom the payment or overpayment, as the casemay be, was made or the estate of that person.
Minister may
makeregulations forthe purposesof this Part.7H.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the
Minister may, with the consent of the Minister forFinance, by regulations prescribe—
(a) a percentage in respect of section
7B(3)( b)(ii),
(b) an amount in respect of section
7B(3)( b)(iv),
(c) a percentage in respect of section 7B(4),
(d) an amount in respect of section
7C(4)( a),
(e) an amount in respect of section
7C(4)( b)(i)(I),
(f) an amount in respect of section
7C(4)( b)(i)(II),
(g) an amount in respect of section
7C(4)( b)(ii),
15S.3S.3
16[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(h) an amount in respect of section
7C(4)( c),
(i) an amount in respect of subsection (4).
(2) The Minister shall only exercise the power
under subsection (1)( a)o r( c) to prescribe a per-
centage referred to in that subsection such that thepercentage prescribed reflects the average cost ofliving in the State.
(3) The Minister shall only exercise the power
under subsection (1)( b),(d), (e),(f),(g), (h)o r( i)
to prescribe an amount referred to in that subsec-tion such that the amount prescribed reflects therate of inflation in the State.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), the amount of
subvention which may be paid under section7C(1)( a) is a weekly maximum rate of \300 or the
prescribed amount, whichever is the greater.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of
section 7C(1)( b) or 7D, the amount of the pre-
scribed subvention that is applicable to a depen-dent person shall, by virtue of this section, bereduced by the amount by which such person’smeans, as determined in the assessment referredto in section 7B(3) or review under section 7D, asthe case requires, made in respect of such person,exceeds the weekly rate of—
(a) subject to paragraph ( b), state pension
(non-contributory),
(b) any successor to that pension in any
case where that pension ceases to beprovided,
payable at the time of assessment.
Transitional
provisions.7I.—(1) Where immediately before the date of
commencement of this section a person was beingpaid a subvention (‘old subvention’) under therevoked Regulations, then, for so long on or afterthat date that the person is maintained in a nursinghome, the person shall, subject to subsection (2),be paid, in lieu of the old subvention, a relevantsubvention equivalent to the old subvention.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed
to prevent section 7D operating to cause—
(a) a relevant subvention referred to in that
subsection to cease to be paid to a per-son referred to in that subsection, or
(b) a relevant subvention to be paid to a
person referred to in that subsectionwhich is not equivalent to the old sub-vention which was paid to the person.[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(3) In subsection (1), ‘revoked Regulations’
means the Nursing Homes (Subvention) Regu-lations 1993 (S.I. No. 227 of 1993) revoked bysection 9 of the Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
Executive shall
issueguidelines.7J.—(1) The Executive shall, as soon as is
practicable—
(a) for the purpose of providing practical
guidance, in respect of any provision ofthis Part (including section 7B(3)( b)(v)),
to dependent persons, applicants, and
persons (including employees of theExecutive) referred to in section 7B(1)or 7D(1)( a)(ii), prepare and issue such
guidelines, not inconsistent with thisAct, as it considers suitable for thepurpose,
(b) for the purpose of making relevant
information available, in respect of anyprovision of this Part which imposes afunction on the Executive, prepare andissue guidelines, not inconsistent withthis Act, setting out the manner inwhich the Executive proposes to per-form that function.
(2) The Executive shall cause guidelines issued
under subsection (1) to be published on itswebsite.
Tax clearance.7K.—(1) In this section, ‘tax clearance certifi-
cate’ means a certificate under section 1095 (assubstituted by section 127( b) of the Finance Act
2002) of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997.
(2) The Executive may refuse to effect the pay-
ment of a relevant subvention in any case wherethe Executive is satisfied that a tax clearance cer-tificate is not in force in respect of the proprietorof the nursing home in which the dependent per-son concerned is or intends to be maintained.”.
4.—The Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 is amended by
inserting the following immediately before section 8:
“PART 3
Fees, Temporary Management of Nursing Homes and
Boarding Out”.
5.—The Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 is amended by
inserting the following immediately before section 11:
17S.3
Insertion of Part
heading beforesection 8.
Insertion of Part
heading beforesection 11.S.5
Substitution of
section 14 of Health(Nursing Homes)Act 1990.
Repeal of section 3
of Health(MiscellaneousProvisions) Act2001.
Amendment of
Schedule 7 toHealth Act 2004.
Revocation of
Nursing Homes(Subvention)Regulations 1993.
Amendment of
section 2 of Health(RepaymentScheme) Act 2006.
Amendment of
Health Act 1970.
18[No. 1.] [2007.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
“PART 4
Miscellaneous”.
6.—The Health (Nursing Homes) Act 1990 is amended by substi-
tuting the following for section 14:
“Laying of
regulations indraft beforeHouses of theOireachtas.14.—Where a regulation is proposed to be made
under this Act, a draft of the regulation shall belaid before each House of the Oireachtas and theregulation shall not be made until a resolutionapproving of the draft has been passed by eachsuch House.”.
7.—Section 3 of the Health (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2001
is repealed.
8.—Schedule 7 to the Health Act 2004 is amended, in Part 4, by
deleting item 6.
9.—The Health (In-Patient Services) Regulations 1993 (S.I. No.
224 of 1993) and the Nursing Homes (Subvention) Regulations 1993(S.I. No. 227 of 1993) are revoked.
10.—Section 2 of the Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 is
amended, in the definition of “spouse”, by substituting “section3(10)” for “section 3(10)( c)”.
11.—The Health Act 1970 is amended by inserting the following
immediately after section 61:
“Information
to be providedto HealthServiceExecutive byhome careproviders.61A.—(1) A home care provider shall give
notice in writing to the Health Service Executive,as soon as it is practicable for the provider to doso, of—
(a) the name and address of the provider,
(b) the name and address of each person to
whom the provider provides homecare services,
(c) the nature of such services so provided,
and
(d) particulars of any change to information
previously given by the provider to theExecutive under any paragraph(including this paragraph) of thissubsection.
(2) The Health Service Executive may, for stat-
istical purposes, retain and process informationgiven to it under subsection (1) and may publiclydisclose—[2007.] [ No. 1.] Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) any particulars of home care providers
who are legal persons, or
(b) any statistics arising from such retention
and processing of such information.
(3) In this section—
‘home care provider’ means a natural or legal per-
son who, whether or not pursuant to arrangementsreferred to in section 61(1), provides, at a charge,home care services;
‘home care service’ means a service made avail-
able in a private dwelling for a person who, byreason of illness, frailty or disability, is unable toprovide the service for himself or herself withoutassistance;
‘private dwelling’, in relation to a person referred
to in the definition of ‘home care service’, means apermanent dwelling that is not open to the generalpublic to visit unless invited and where that personhabitually resides.”.
12.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Health (Nursing Homes)
(Amendment) Act 2007.
(2) The Health Acts 1947 to 2006 and this Act may be cited
together as the Health Acts 1947 to 2007 and shall be read togetheras one.
(3) This Act (except sections 10 and 11) shall come into operation
on such day or days as the Minister for Health and Children mayappoint by order or orders either generally or with reference to anyparticular purpose or provision, and different days may be soappointed for different purposes and different provisions.
19S.11
Short title,
construction,collective citationandcommencement.