————————
Number 20of2009
————————
COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definitions.
2. Amendment of section 194 of Principal Act.3. Amendment of section 371A of Principal Act.4. Amendment of section 19 of Act of 1990.5. Amendment of section 20 of Act of 1990.6. Amendment of section 23 of Act of 1990.7. Amendment of section 40 of Act of 1990.8. Disclosure of loans, etc., — amendment of exceptions applic-
able to directors of licensed banks and provisions as tooffences and other matters.
9. Amendments of other provisions of Act of 1990 concerning
licensed banks and disclosure of loans, etc.
10. Amendment of sections 43 and 44 of Companies
(Amendment) (No. 2) Act 1999.
11. Short title and construction.
————————
12[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
Central Bank Acts 1942 to 1998
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
Acts 2003 and 2004
Companies Act 1963 1963, No. 33Companies Act 1990 1990, No. 33Companies (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 1999 1999, No. 30Company Law Enforcement Act 2001 2001, No. 28Companies (Auditing and Accounting) Act 2003 2003, No. 44————————
Number 20of2009
————————
COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO REMOVE CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS CONTAINED
IN THE COMPANIES ACTS THAT APPLY IN THE CASESOF COMPANIES HOLDING LICENCES UNDERSECTION 9 OF THE CENTRAL BANK ACT 1971 (ORHOLDING COMPANIES OF SUCH COMPANIES)REGARDING DISCLOSURE OF LOANS TO DIRECTORSAND TRANSACTIONS OF AN ANALOGOUS NATURE,TO OTHERWISE AMEND THE COMPANIES ACTS INRESPECT OF LOANS BY COMPANIES (OF WHATEVERTYPE) TO DIRECTORS OR CERTAIN RELATED PAR-TIES AND TRANSACTIONS OF AN ANALOGOUS NAT-URE AND, IN PARTICULAR, TO AMEND SECTION 40OF THE COMPANIES ACT 1990 CONCERNING CRIMI-NAL LIABILITY IN THAT REGARD, TO CONFERADDITIONAL POWERS ON THE DIRECTOR OF COR-PORATE ENFORCEMENT WITH RESPECT TO ACCESSTO INFORMATION IN THE POSSESSION OF COMPAN-IES, INCLUDING INFORMATION KEPT BY THEM INCERTAIN REGISTERS OR BOOKS, OR IN THE POS-SESSION OF THIRD PARTIES, TO AMEND SECTIONS 20AND 23 OF THE COMPANIES ACT 1990 IN RELATIONTO SEARCH WARRANTS AND PROCEDURES TO BEFOLLOWED IN CASES OF CLAIMS OF LEGAL PRO-FESSIONAL PRIVILEGE, TO AMEND SECTIONS 43 AND44 OF THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) ACT1999 AND TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[12th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Act of 1990” means the Companies Act 1990;
“Act of 2001” means the Company Law Enforcement Act 2001;“Act of 2003” means the Companies (Auditing and Accounting)
Act 2003;
“Principal Act” means the Companies Act 1963.
2.—Section 194 (as amended by the Act of 2003) of the Principal
Act is amended—
3
Definitions.
Amendment of
section 194 ofPrincipal Act.S.2
Amendment of
section 371A ofPrincipal Act.
Amendment of
section 19 of Act of1990.
4[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
(a) in subsection (5)( b), by substituting “fails to comply with
this subsection or subsection (5A)” for “fails to complywith this subsection”; and
(b) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (5):
“(5A) A company shall, if required by the Director,
produce to the Director for inspection the book kept byit in accordance with subsection (5)( a) and shall give the
Director such facilities for inspecting and taking copies ofthe contents of the book as the Director may require.”.
3.—Section 371A (inserted by the Act of 2001) of the Principal
Act is amended, in subsection (1), by substituting “section 19(3)( c)”
for “section 19(3)( b)”.
4.—(1) Section 19 (inserted by the Act of 2001) of the Act of 1990
is amended—
(a) by substituting the following subsections for subsection
(3):
“(3) Where by virtue of subsection (1) the Director has
power to require the production of any books or docu-ments from any body, the Director shall have power torequire the production of—
(a) those books or documents from any person who
appears to the Director to be in possession ofthem,
(b) copies of any books or documents of the body
from any person who appears to the Directorto be in possession of them, and
(c) subject to subsection (4), other books or docu-
ments (whether the originals of them orotherwise) which may relate to any books ordocuments of the body from any person whoappears to the Director to be in possession ofsuch other books or documents,
but where any such person claims a lien on books or docu-
ments produced by him, the production shall be withoutprejudice to the lien.
(3A) Any requirement under subsection (3) shall be
made by the giving by the Director of a direction to theperson of whom the requirement is being made thatspecifies—
(a) the books or documents to be produced by the
person, and
(b) the time and place at which they are to be
produced.”;
(b) in subsection (4), by substituting “subsection (3)( c)” for
“subsection (3)( b)” in each place where it occurs; and[2009.] [ No.20.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
(c) in subsection (9), by substituting “a direction under sub-
section (1) or (3A)” for “a direction under subsection(1)”.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed to mean that, but
for the amendment effected by it, a direction given by the Director ofCorporate Enforcement, before the passing of this Act, under section19(3) of the Act of 1990 was limited in any way as to its effect orextent of operation or that any books or documents produced onfoot of it to the Director of Corporate Enforcement were not law-fully produced to him.
5.—Section 20 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in subsection (2), by substituting “at any time or times
within the period of validity of the warrant” for “at anytime or times within 1 month from the date of issue ofthe warrant”;
(b) by inserting the following subsections after subsection (2):
“(2A) Without prejudice to subsection (2B), where—
(a) the officer finds anything at, or in the custody
or possession of any person found on, thepremises named in the warrant that the officerhas reasonable grounds for believing may beor may contain material information, and
(b) it is not reasonably practicable for a determi-
nation to be made on the premises—
(i) whether what he has found is something
that he is entitled to seize under the war-rant (whether as mentioned in subsection(2)(d) or subsection (2B)), or
(ii) the extent to which what he has found con-
tains something that he is entitled to seizeunder the warrant in either of those cases,
the officer’s powers of seizure under the warrant shall
include power to seize so much of what he has found as itis necessary to remove from the premises to enable that tobe determined (in subsections (2D) to (2G) referred to asan ‘extended power of seizure’).
(2B) Where—
(a) the officer finds anything at, or in the custody
or possession of any person found on, thepremises named in the warrant being a book,document or other thing constituting materialinformation (‘seizable information’) which hewould be entitled to seize but for its being com-prised in something else that he has (apartfrom this subsection) no power to seize, and
(b) it is not reasonably practicable for the seizable
information to be separated, on those prem-ises, from that in which it is comprised,
5S.4
Amendment of
section 20 of Act of1990.S.5
6[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
the officer’s powers of seizure shall include power to seize
both the seizable information and that from which it is notreasonably practicable to separate it (in subsections (2D)to (2G) also referred to as an ‘extended power of seizure’).
(2C) Where, for the purposes of subsection (2A) or
(2B), an issue arises as to either of the following matters,namely—
(a) whether or not it is reasonably practicable on
particular premises for something to be deter-mined, or
(b) whether or not it is reasonably practicable on
particular premises for something to be separ-ated from something else,
the issue shall be decided by reference solely to the follow-
ing matters:
(i) how long it would take to carry out the determi-
nation or separation on those premises;
(ii) the number of persons that would be required
to carry out that determination or separationon those premises within a reasonable period;
(iii) whether the determination or separation would
(or would if carried out on those premises)involve damage to property;
(iv) the apparatus or equipment that it would be
necessary or appropriate to use for the carryingout of the determination or separation;
(v) the costs of carrying out the determination or
separation on those premises as against thecosts of carrying out the determination or sep-aration in another place (being a place in whichthe Director can show it would be appropriateto do the thing concerned and in which theDirector intends to arrange, or does arrange,for the thing to be done), and
(vi) in the case of separation, whether the
separation—
(I) would be likely, or
(II) if carried out by the only means that are
reasonably practicable on those premises,would be likely,
to prejudice the use of some or all of the separ-
ated seizable information for a purpose forwhich something seized under the warrant iscapable of being used.
(2D) Save where the officer is of opinion that com-
pliance with this subsection could result in the conceal-ment, falsification, destruction or the disposal otherwise ofmaterial information, an extended power of seizure shall[2009.] [ No.20.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
not be exercised unless the officer has first made the fol-
lowing arrangements in relation to the thing or things, thesubject of the proposed exercise of that power, namelyreasonable arrangements—
(a) providing for the appropriate storage of that
thing or those things,
(b) allowing reasonable access, from time to time,
to that thing or those things by the owner, law-ful custodian or possessor thereof (including, inthe case of documents or information in non-legible form, by the making of copies or thetransmission of matter by electronic means),and
(c) providing for confidentiality to be maintained as
regards any confidential matter comprised inthat thing or those things,
being arrangements to apply pending the making of the
foregoing determination or the carrying out of the forego-ing separation and the consequent return of anything tothe owner, lawful custodian or possessor that is notmaterial information; in deciding what the terms of thosearrangements shall be, the officer shall have regard to anyrepresentations reasonably made on the matter by theowner, lawful custodian or possessor of the thing or things
and endeavour, where practicable, to secure the agree-ment of that person to those terms.
(2E) Where—
(a) by reason of the officer being of the opinion
referred to in subsection (2D), the arrange-ments referred to in paragraphs ( a)t o( c)o f
that subsection are not made in relation to thething or things the subject of the proposedexercise of the extended power of seizure, or
(b) circumstances arise subsequent to the exercise
of the extended power of seizure that make itappropriate to vary the arrangements madeunder that subsection,
the officer shall, as the case may be—
(i) make, as soon as practicable after the exercise
of that power of seizure, the arrangementsreferred to in subsection (2D)( a)t o( c)i n
relation to the thing or things concerned, or
(ii) vary the arrangements made under that subsec-
tion in a manner he considers appropriate,
and, in deciding what shall be the terms of those arrange-
ments or that variation, the officer shall have regard toany representations on the matter reasonably made by theowner, lawful custodian or possessor of the thing or thingsconcerned and endeavour, where practicable, to secure theagreement of that person to those terms.
7S.5S.5
8[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
(2F) Where an extended power of seizure is exercised,
it shall be the duty of the officer—
(a) to carry out the determination or separation
concerned as soon as practicable, and, in anyevent, subject to subsection (2G), within theprescribed period, after its exercise, and
(b) as respects anything seized in exercise of the
power found not to be material information or,as the case may be, anything separated fromanother thing in the exercise of the power thatis not material information, to return, as soonas practicable, and, in any event, subject tosubsection (2G), within the prescribed period,after that finding or separation, the thing to itsowner or the person appearing to the officer tobe lawfully entitled to the custody or pos-session of it.
(2G) On application to the court by the Director or any
person affected by the exercise of an extended power ofseizure, the court may, if it thinks fit and having hadregard, in particular, to any submissions made on behalfof the Director with regard to the progress of any investi-gation being carried on by the Director for the purpose ofwhich the powers under this section had been exercised,give one or more of the following:
(a) a direction that the doing of an act referred to
in subsection (2F)( a)o r( b) shall be done
within such lesser or greater period of timethan that specified in that provision as thecourt determines,
(b) a direction with respect to the making, variation
or operation of arrangements referred to insubsection (2D)( a)t o( c) in relation to a thing
concerned or a direction that such arrange-ments as the court provides for in the directionshall have effect in place of any such arrange-ments that have been or were proposed to bemade,
(c) a direction of any other kind that the court con-
siders it just to give for the purpose of furthersecuring the rights of any person affected bythe exercise of an extended power of seizure,including, if the exceptional circumstances ofthe case warrant doing so, a direction that athing seized be returned to its owner or theperson appearing to the court to be lawfullyentitled to the custody or possession of it, not-withstanding that the determination or separ-ation concerned has not occurred,
and any such direction may—
(i) relate to some or all of the things the subject of
the exercise of the extended power of seizure,
(ii) be expressed to operate subject to such terms
and conditions as the court specifies, including,[2009.] [ No.20.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
in the case of a direction under paragraph ( c),
a condition that an officer of the Director bepermitted, during a specified subsequentperiod, to re-take and retain possession of thething returned for the purpose of carrying outthe determination or separation concerned(and, retain after the expiry of that period, thatwhich is found to be material information or ismaterial information).
(2H) An application under subsection (2G) shall be by
motion and may, if the court directs, be heard otherwisethan in public.
(2I) In subsection (2F) ‘prescribed period’ means—
(a) in the case of paragraph ( a)o fi t —
(i) unless subparagraph (ii) applies, 3 months,
or
(ii) such other period as the Minister prescribes
in consequence of a review that may, fromtime to time, be carried out by or onbehalf of the Minister of the operation andimplementation of the amendmentseffected by section 5 of the Companies
(Amendment) Act 2009 ,
(b) in the case of paragraph ( b)o fi t —
(i) unless subparagraph (ii) applies, 7 days, or
(ii) such other period as the Minister prescribes
in consequence of such a review that may,from time to time, be carried out by or onbehalf of the Minister,
but no regulations made to prescribe such a period shall
be read as operating to affect any direction given by thecourt under subsection (2G)( a) in force on the commence-
ment of those regulations.
(2J) The Minister may make regulations providing for
such supplementary, consequential and incidental mattersto or in respect of subsections (2A) to (2F) as he considersnecessary or expedient.”;
and
(c) by adding the following subsections after subsection (7):
“(8) The period of validity of a warrant shall be 1
month from its date of issue but that period of validity maybe extended in accordance with subsections (9) and (10).
(9) The officer may, during the period of validity of a
warrant (including such period as previously extendedunder subsection (10)), apply to a judge of the DistrictCourt for an order extending the period of validity of thewarrant and such an application shall be grounded uponinformation on oath laid by the officer stating, by refer-ence to the purpose or purposes for which the warrant
9S.5S.5
Amendment of
section 23 of Act of1990.
10[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
was issued, the reasons why he considers the extension to
be necessary.
(10) If the judge of the District Court is satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds for believing, having regardto that information so laid, that further time is needed sothat the purpose or purposes for which the warrant wasissued can be fulfilled, the judge may make an orderextending the period of validity of the warrant by suchperiod as, in the opinion of the judge, is appropriate andjust; where such an order is made, the judge shall causethe warrant to be suitably endorsed to indicate itsextended period of validity.
(11) Nothing in the preceding subsections prevents a
judge of the District Court from issuing, on foot of a freshapplication made under subsection (1), a further searchwarrant under this section in relation to the samepremises.”.
6.—Section 23 of the Act of 1990 is amended by substituting the
following subsections for subsection (1):
“(1) In this section—
‘computer’ has the same meaning as it has in section 20;‘information’ means information contained in a document, a
computer or otherwise;
‘privileged legal material’ means information which, in the
opinion of the court, a person is entitled to refuse to produceon the grounds of legal professional privilege.
(1A) Subject to subsection (1B), nothing in this Part shall
compel the disclosure by any person of privileged legal materialor authorise the taking of privileged legal material.
(1B) The disclosure of information may be compelled, or
possession of it taken, pursuant to the powers in this Part, not-withstanding that it is apprehended that the information is privi-leged legal material provided the compelling of its disclosureor the taking of its possession is done by means whereby theconfidentiality of the information can be maintained (as againstthe person compelling such disclosure or taking such possession)pending the determination by the court of the issue as towhether the information is privileged legal material.
(1C) Without prejudice to subsection (1D), where, in the cir-
cumstances referred to in subsection (1B), information has beendisclosed or taken possession of pursuant to the powers in thisPart, the person—
(a) to whom such information has been so disclosed, or
(b) who has taken possession of it,
shall (unless the person has, within the period subsequently
mentioned in this subsection, been served with notice of anapplication under subsection (1D) in relation to the matterconcerned) apply to the court for a determination as to whetherthe information is privileged legal material and an application[2009.] [ No.20.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
under this subsection shall be made within 7 days after the dis-
closure or the taking of possession.
(1D) A person who, in the circumstances referred to in sub-
section (1B), is compelled to disclose information, or fromwhose possession information is taken, pursuant to the powersin this Part, may apply to the court for a determination as towhether the information is privileged legal material.
(1E) Pending the making of a final determination of an appli-
cation under subsection (1C) or (1D), the court may give suchinterim or interlocutory directions as the court considers appro-priate including, without prejudice to the generality of the fore-going, directions as to—
(a) the preservation of the information, in whole or in
part, in a safe and secure place in any manner speci-fied by the court,
(b) the appointment of a person with suitable legal quali-
fications possessing the level of experience, and theindependence from any interest falling to be deter-mined between the parties concerned, that the courtconsiders to be appropriate for the purpose of—
(i) examining the information, and
(ii) preparing a report for the court with a view to
assisting or facilitating the court in the makingby the court of its determination as to whetherthe information is privileged legal material.
(1F) An application under subsection (1C), (1D) or (1E)
shall be by motion and may, if the court directs, be heard other-wise than in public.”.
7.—The following section is substituted for section 40 of the Act
of 1990:
“Criminal
penalties forbreach ofsection 31.40.—If a company enters into a transaction or
arrangement that contravenes section 31, everyofficer of the company who is in default shall beguilty of an offence.”.
8.—(1) Section 41 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (6):
“(6) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply for the pur-
poses of any accounts prepared by any company which isa licensed bank, or the holding company of a licensedbank, in relation to—
(a) a transaction or arrangement of a kind
described in section 31 entered into for a per-son who at any time during the relevant periodwas connected with a director of that companyor that holding company; or
(b) an agreement to enter into such a transaction or
arrangement for a person so connected,
11S.6
Amendment of
section 40 of Act of1990.
Disclosure of loans,
etc., — amendmentof exceptionsapplicable todirectors of licensedbanks andprovisions as tooffences and othermatters.S.8
12[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
to which the licensed bank is a party.”;
and
(b) by adding the following subsections after subsection (9):
“(10) Nothing in this section or sections 42 to 45 preju-
dices the operation of any—
(a) rule or other instrument; or
(b) direction or requirement,
made, issued, granted or otherwise created under the Cen-
tral Bank Acts 1942 to 1998, the Central Bank and Finan-cial Services Authority of Ireland Acts 2003 and 2004 orany other enactment requiring a licensed bank, or a hold-ing company of a licensed bank, to disclose particulars,whether in accounts prepared by it or otherwise, of trans-actions, arrangements or agreements (whether of the kinddescribed in section 31 or not) entered into by thelicensed bank.
(11) Where a company makes default in complying
with this section, the company and every person who atthe time of that default is a director of the company shallbe guilty of an offence.
(12) It shall be a defence in proceedings for an offence
under subsection (11) for the defendant to prove that hetook all reasonable steps for securing compliance with therequirements of this section.”.
(2) Section 43 of the Act of 1990 is amended by substituting the
following subsections for subsections (5) and (6):
“(5) The following, namely—
(a) the group accounts of a company which is, or is the
holding company of, a licensed bank prepared inaccordance with the requirements of section 150 ofthe Principal Act; and
(b) the accounts of any other company which is a licensed
bank prepared in accordance with the requirementsof section 148 of the Principal Act,
in respect of the relevant period shall contain a statement in
relation to transactions, arrangements and agreements madeby—
(i) the company preparing the accounts, if it is a licensed
bank; and
(ii) in the case of a holding company, by any of its subsidi-
aries which is a licensed bank,
for persons who at any time during the relevant period were
connected with a director of the company of—
(I) the aggregate amounts outstanding at the end of the
relevant period under transactions, arrangements[2009.] [ No.20.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
and agreements coming within any paragraph of sub-
section (1) (which transactions, arrangements andagreements, coming within any particular such para-graph, are referred to subsequently in this section
as ‘relevant transactions, arrangements andagreements’);
(II) the aggregate maximum amounts outstanding during
the relevant period under relevant transactions,arrangements and agreements made for persons soconnected;
(III) the number of persons so connected for whom rel-
evant transactions, arrangements and agreementsthat subsisted at the end of the relevant period weremade; and
(IV) the maximum number of persons so connected for
whom relevant transactions, arrangements andagreements that subsisted at any time during the rel-evant period were made.
(6) A transaction, arrangement or agreement to which sub-
section (5) applies need not be included in the statementreferred to in that subsection if—
(a) it is entered into by the company concerned in the
ordinary course of its business, and
(b) its value is not greater, and its terms no more favour-
able, in respect of the person for whom it is made,than that or those which—
(i) the company ordinarily offers, or
(ii) it is reasonable to expect the company to have
offered,
to or in respect of a person of the same financial
standing but unconnected with the company.
(6A) In reckoning the aggregate maximum amounts or the
maximum number of persons referred to in subsection (5)(II)or (IV), as appropriate, there shall not be counted, as the casemay be—
(a) relevant transactions, arrangements and agreements
made by the company, or a subsidiary of it, referredto in subsection (5) and which is a licensed bank forany person connected as mentioned in that subsec-tion if the aggregate maximum amount outstandingduring the relevant period under relevant trans-actions, arrangements and agreements made for thatperson does not exceed \3,174.35; or
(b) a person so connected for whom the aggregate
maximum amount outstanding as mentioned in para-graph ( a) does not exceed the amount there
mentioned.”.
(3) Section 43 of the Act of 1990 is further amended—
13S.8S.8
Amendments of
other provisions ofAct of 1990concerning licensedbanks anddisclosure of loans,etc.
14[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
(a) in subsection (7), by substituting “subsection (2) or (5)”
for “subsection (2), (5) or (6)”;
(b) in subsection (8), by substituting “subsections (2) and (5)”
for “subsections (2), (5) and (6)”;
(c) by deleting subsection (9); and
(d) by adding the following subsections after subsection (10):
“(11) Where a company makes default in complying
with this section, the company and every person who atthe time of that default is a director of the company shallbe guilty of an offence.
(12) It shall be a defence in proceedings for an offence
under subsection (11) for the defendant to prove that hetook all reasonable steps for securing compliance with therequirements of this section.”.
9.—Section 44 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by substituting “are required by subsec-
tion (1) or (2) of section 41 or would, but for section41(6), be required by subsection (1) or (2) of that section”for “would, but for section 41(6), be required by subsec-tion (1) or (2) of that section”;
(b) by inserting the following subsections after subsection (4):
“(4A) Subsection (3) shall not require the inclusion in
the statement of particulars of any transaction, arrange-ment or agreement if, by reason of—
(a) the company’s not taking advantage of section
41(6); or
(b) the company’s being required by a rule, instru-
ment, direction or requirement referred to insection 41(10) to disclose such information inthe following manner,
the company has included in the group accounts or
accounts referred to in section 41(1) or (2), as the casemay be, for the last complete financial year mentioned insubsection (3) particulars of the transaction, arrangementor agreement which, but for either of those reasons, itwould not have disclosed in those accounts by virtue ofsection 41(6).
(4B) Where subsection (1) falls to be applied to a com-
pany which is the holding company of a licensed bank,each of the references in subsection (2) to the company,other than the first such reference, shall be deemed to bea reference to the licensed bank.
(4C) A company shall, if required by the Director,
produce to the Director for inspection the register keptby it in accordance with subsection (1) and shall give theDirector such facilities for inspecting and taking copies ofthe contents of the register as the Director may require.”;[2009.] [ No.20.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
(c) in subsection (8), by substituting “subsection (1), (3) or
(4C)” for “subsection (1) or (3)”; and
(d) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (9):
“(9) It shall be a defence in proceedings for an offence
under subsection (8) (being an offence consisting of a fail-ure to comply with subsection (1) or (3)) for the defendantto prove that he took all reasonable steps for securingcompliance with subsection (1) or (3), as the case maybe.”.
10.—(1) Section 43 of the Companies (Amendment) (No. 2) Act
1999 is amended—
(a) in subsections (1), (2), (8) and (9), by substituting “a
Member State of the EEA” for “the State”;
(b) by repealing subsection (12); and
(c) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (16)
(inserted by the Act of 2003):
“(16) In this section—
‘director’ does not include an alternate director;
‘Member State of the EEA’ means a state that is a con-
tracting party to the Agreement on the European Econ-omic Area signed at Oporto on 2 May 1992, as amendedfor the time being.”.
(2) Section 44 of the Companies (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 1999
is amended—
(a) in subsection (8), by substituting “So far as it is the per-
son’s residence in the State that falls to be determinedfor the purposes of that section, for the purposes of
section 43,” for “For the purposes of section 43,”; and
(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (11):
“(12) For the purposes of this section a company has a
real and continuous link with an economic activity that isbeing carried on in the State if one or more of the follow-ing conditions are satisfied by it:
(a) the affairs of the company are managed by one
or more persons from a place of business estab-lished in the State and that person or those per-sons is or are authorised by the company to acton its behalf;
(b) the company carries on a trade in the State;
(c) the company is a subsidiary or a holding com-
pany of a company or another body corporatethat satisfies either or both of the conditionsspecified in paragraphs ( a) and ( b);
15S.9
Amendment of
sections 43 and 44of Companies(Amendment)(No. 2) Act 1999.S.10
Short title and
construction.
16[No.20.] [2009.] Companies (Amendment) Act 2009 .
(d) the company is a subsidiary of a company,
another subsidiary of which satisfies either orboth of the conditions specified in paragraphs(a) and ( b).”.
11.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Companies (Amendment)
Act 2009.
(2) The Companies Acts and this Act shall be read as one.