————————
Number 21of2007
————————
BUILDING CONTROL ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title, collective citation, construction and com-
mencement.
2. Interpretation.
PART 2
Amendment of Building Control Act 1990
3. Amendment of section 1 (interpretation) of Act of 1990.4. Amendment of section 3 (building regulations) of Act of
1990.
5. Amendment of section 6 (building control regulations) of
Act of 1990.
6. Amendment of section 7 (appeals) of Act of 1990.7. Amendment of Act of 1990 — new sections 7A and 7B.8. Amendment of section 8 (enforcement notice) of Act of
1990.
9. Amendment of section 9 (application to District Court in
relation to enforcement notice) of Act of 1990.
10. Amendment of section 12 (order of High Court in relation
to buildings and works) of Act of 1990.
11. Amendment of section 17 (penalties) of Act of 1990.12. Amendment of Act of 1990 — new sections 17A and 17B.
1Click here for
Explanatory Memorandum2[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
PART 3
Registration of Architects
13. Registration body and Admissions Board ( Part 3 ).
14. Registration of architects.15. Registration of nationals from certain other states — main
categories of such nationals.
16. Further category of nationals from certain other states who
are eligible for registration.
17. Fees ( Part 3 ).
18. Prohibition against using term “architect” unless registered.19. Registrar ( Part 3 ).
20. Removal from register ( Part 3 ).
21. Technical Assessment Board ( Part 3 ).
22. Technical Assessment Board procedure ( Part 3 ).
23. Professional Conduct Committee ( Part 3 ).
24. Appeals Board ( Part 3 ).
25. Appeals procedure ( Part 3 ).
26. Appeal to High Court from decision of Appeals Board
(Part 3 ).
27. Certain other jurisdiction of Appeals Board ( Part 3 ).
PART 4
Registration of Quantity Surveyors
28. Registration body and Admissions Board ( Part 4 ).
29. Registration of quantity surveyors.30. Nationals from other states eligible for registration ( Part 4 ).
31. Fees ( Part 4 ).
32. Prohibition against using term “quantity surveyor” unless
registered.
33. Registrar ( Part 4 ).
34. Removal from register ( Part 4 ).
35. Technical Assessment Board ( Part 4 ).
36. Technical Assessment Board procedure ( Part 4 ).
37. Professional Conduct Committee ( Part 4 ).
38. Appeals Board ( Part 4 ).[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
39. Appeals procedure ( Part 4 ).
40. Appeal to High Court from decision of Appeals Board
(Part 4 ).
41. Certain other jurisdiction of Appeals Board ( Part 4 ).
PART 5
Registration of Building Surveyors
42. Registration body and Admissions Board ( Part 5 ).
43. Registration of building surveyors.44. Nationals from other states eligible for registration ( Part 5 ).
45. Fees ( Part 5 ).
46. Prohibition against using term “building surveyor” unless
registered.
47. Registrar ( Part 5 ).
48. Removal from register ( Part 5 ).
49. Technical Assessment Board ( Part 5 ).
50. Technical Assessment Board procedure ( Part 5 ).
51. Professional Conduct Committee ( Part 5 ).
52. Appeals Board ( Part 5 ).
53. Appeals procedure ( Part 5 ).
54. Appeal to High Court from decision of Appeals Board
(Part 5 ).
55. Certain other jurisdiction of Appeals Board ( Part 5 ).
PART 6
Fitness to Practise
56. Establishment of Professional Conduct Standards.
57. Complaints to Professional Conduct Committee.58. Decision of the Professional Conduct Committee.59. Proceedings privileged.
PART 7
Miscellaneous Provisions
60. Temporary registration under Title II of Directive.61. Registration body may seek assistance and make rules.62. Registration body may specify fees.
34[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
63. Additional qualifications.
64. Regulations.65. Correction of register.66. Expenses of registration bodies, boards and committees, etc.67. Prosecution of offences under this Act.68. Evidential value of an extract from register.69. Nomination to boards or committees and elections.70. Tenure of members of boards, etc., appointed by regis-
tration body.
71. Proceedings at meetings of boards or committees.72. Functions in relation to regulations or directives of the
Council of the EU or the European Parliament.
73. Annual report by registration body.
————————
Acts Referred to
Building Control Act 1990 1990, No. 3
European Communities Act 1972 1972, No. 27Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 1851, Vic., c. 93————————
Number 21of2007
————————
BUILDING CONTROL ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND AND EXTEND THE BUILDING
CONTROL ACT 1990; TO REGULATE THE USE OF THETITLES “ARCHITECT”, “QUANTITY SURVEYOR” AND“BUILDING SURVEYOR”; TO IMPLEMENT CERTAINPROVISIONS OF DIRECTIVE 2005/36/EC OF THEEUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL OF7 SEPTEMBER 2005 ON THE RECOGNITION OFPROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS AND TO PROVIDEFOR RELATED MATTERS.
[21st April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Building Control Act 2007.
(2) The Building Control Act 1990 and this Act may be cited
together as the Building Control Acts 1990 and 2007 and shall beconstrued together as one.
(3) This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may appoint by order or orders either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or different provisions.
2.—(1) In this Act—
“Act of 1990” means the Building Control Act 1990;“adaptation period” means an adaptation period of such duration as
the Admissions Board determines in accordance with the Directive;
“Admissions Board” means an Admissions Board established under
section 13 ,28or42, as the context requires;
5Short title,
collective citation,construction andcommencement.
Interpretation.Pt.1S . 2
6[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
“Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation” means the
Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation done atMarrakesh on 15 April 1994 as amended or supplemented by anyprotocol to that Agreement which is for the time being in force inthe State;
“Appeals Board” means an Appeals Board established under section
24,38or52, as the context requires;
“aptitude test” means an aptitude test of such character as the
Admissions Board determines in accordance with the Directive;
“Directive” means Directive 2005/36/EC
1of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on therecognition of professional qualifications as amended by CouncilDirective 2006/100/EC of 20 November 2006 adapting certainDirectives in the field of freedom of movement of persons, by reasonof the accession of Bulgaria and Romania;
“EEA Agreement” means the Agreement on the European
Economic Area signed at Oporto on 2 May 1992, as amended forthe time being;
“EEA measure” means a measure or decision taken by the Joint
Committee under the EEA Agreement;
“member of the World Trade Organisation” means a party to the
Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation;
“Member State” means a Member State of the European Union and
includes the following:
(a) on the State being required to implement an EEA
measure having an effect corresponding to that of theDirective or any other Directive adopted by an institutionof the European Union for the recognition ofprofessional education and training, a Member State ofthe EEA;
(b) the Swiss Confederation;
“Member State of the EEA” means a state (other than a Member
State of the European Union) that is a contracting party to theEEA Agreement;
“Minister” means the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and
Local Government;
“poor professional performance”, in relation to a registered
professional, means any failure of the registered professional to meetthe standards of competence that may reasonably be expected ofregistered professionals practising the profession concerned;
“practical experience assessment procedures” means the procedures
under, as the context requires—
(a)sections 21(4) and (5)and 22,
(b)section 36 ,o r
(c)section 50 ;
1O.J. L223/15, 30.9.2005.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Minister
under this Act;
“Professional Conduct Committee” means a Professional Conduct
Committee established under section 23 ,37or51, as the context
requires;
“professional misconduct”, in relation to a registered professional,
means any act, omission or pattern of conduct of the registeredprofessional that—
(a) is in breach of the code prepared by the relevant
registration body, or
(b) if the registered professional has been granted by a body
established in a state, other than the State, a licence,certificate or registration relating to the practice of theprofession concerned, is a breach of the standard ofconduct or performance that applies to a person holdingthat licence, certificate or registration and thatcorresponds to a standard in the code referred to inparagraph (a) ;
“registered professional” means a person who is registered in the
register under Part 3 ,4or5, as the context requires;
“Registrar” means a person appointed under section 19 ,33or47,a s
the context requires;
“registration body” means, with respect to—
(a)Part 3 , the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland,
(b)Parts 4 and 5, the Society of Chartered Surveyors,
(c)Parts 6 and 7, each of the bodies referred to in paragraphs
(a)and (b), with respect to such body performing its
functions for the purpose of the relevant Parts;
“relevant measure” means—
(a) any EEA measure having an effect corresponding to that
of the Directive or any other Directive adopted by aninstitution of the European Union for the recognition ofprofessional education and training, and
(b) a measure that is in force by virtue of the Swiss
Confederation Agreement;
“specified”, in relation to a fee or an amount of a fee, means
specified under section 62 ;
“Swiss Confederation Agreement” means the agreement between
the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the freemovement of persons, signed at Luxembourg on 21 June 1999;
“Technical Assessment Board” means a Technical Assessment
Board established under section 21 ,35or49, as the context requires;
“World Trade Organisation” means the organisation established
under the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation.
7Pt.1S . 2Pt.1S . 2
Amendment of
section 1(interpretation) ofAct of 1990.
Amendment of
section 3 (buildingregulations) of Actof 1990.
Amendment of
section 6 (buildingcontrol regulations)of Act of 1990.
8[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, the definition of “registered
professional” in subsection (1) does not have the effect of requiring
any class of person falling within that definition to be the subject ofany designation or other specification in regulations under the Actof 1990 of a person or a class of person for any purpose of thoseregulations.
(3) A word or expression used in Part 3 ,4,5or7and which is
also used in the Directive has the same meaning in that Part as it hasin the Directive.
PART 2
Amendment of Building Control Act 1990
3.—Section 1(3) of the Act of 1990 is amended by substituting
“, paragraph or subparagraph” for “or paragraph” in both placeswhere it occurs.
4.—Section 3 of the Act of 1990 is amended in subsection (2)—
(a) in paragraph ( e), by substituting “practice;” for “practice;
and”, and
(b) by inserting the following paragraph after paragraph ( e):
“(ea) making provision for building practices that
would assist in preventing or detecting crime;and”.
5.—Section 6 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in subsection (2)( a)(ii), by deleting “and”, after
“provisions of building regulations as may beprescribed,”,
(b) in subsection (2)( a)(iii), by substituting “the requirements
of building regulations,” for “the requirements ofbuilding regulations;”,
(c) in subsection (2)( a), by inserting the following after
subparagraph (iii):
“(iv) the submission (before grant of the relevant
fire safety certificate) of a notice in writingto a building control authority (in this Actreferred to as a ‘7 day notice’) by a personwho intends to commence work on theconstruction of a building or an extensionof or a material alteration to a building,giving not less than 7 days notice of thatperson’s intention to carry out thoseworks, and requiring that such notice shallbe accompanied by a valid application fora fire safety certificate,
(v) the submission to a building control
authority by a person who submits a 7 daynotice of a statutory declaration (in this[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
Act referred to as a ‘7 day notice statutory
declaration’) made by that person statingthat the application for the relevant firesafety certificate has been completed in allrespects and complies with the relevantprovisions of the building controlregulations, that any works that have beencommenced before the grant of suchcertificate will comply with the buildingregulations and that the person will, withinsuch period as may be specified by thebuilding control authority, carry out anymodification of such works that is requiredby or under the fire safety certificate,including any condition attached to it,
when it is granted by the building controlauthority concerned,
(vi) where an application for a fire safety
certificate in respect of the construction ofa building or an extension of or a materialalteration to a building has beensubmitted before planning permission hasbeen granted in respect of suchconstruction, extension or alteration, thesubmission, if required by the subsequentgrant of such planning permission, of afurther application to a building controlauthority for a fire safety certificate (inthis Act referred to as a ‘revised fire safetycertificate’) for the purpose of ensuringthat the revised design arising from thegrant of planning permission (includingany condition attached to it) complies withthe provisions of building regulationsrelating to fire safety,
(vii) where work has been commenced or
completed in respect of the constructionof a building or an extension of or amaterial alteration to a building, and noapplication has been made for a fire safetycertificate that is required under buildingcontrol regulations for such construction,extension of or material alteration to abuilding, the submission to a buildingcontrol authority of an application for acertificate (a ‘regularisation certificate’)which shall be accompanied by drawingsof the relevant works (as they have beenconstructed) and a statutory declarationfrom the applicant stating that such workscomply with the provisions of the buildingregulations relating to fire safety, andenabling the authority to specify in aregularisation certificate that theregularisation certificate shall not haveeffect unless, within 4 months after itsbeing granted, any conditions attached toit by the authority (including conditions asto the carrying out of additional works)are complied with,
9Pt.2S . 5Pt.2S . 5
10[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(viii) a building control authority to inspect
(before it decides whether to grant such acertificate) a building in respect of whichan application has been submitted for aregularisation certificate and enabling theauthority to grant, if it considers itappropriate, in its discretion, to do so, aregularisation certificate specifying that inits opinion the works, as constructed inaccordance with plans, documents andinformation submitted with theapplication for the certificate, comply withthe provisions of building regulationsrelating to fire safety, subject tocompliance (within the period of 4 monthsthere mentioned) with any conditionsattached to the certificate of the kindmentioned in subparagraph (vii),
(ix) the submission to a building control
authority of an application for a certificateof compliance with respect torequirements under the buildingregulations for provision of access to abuilding for persons with disabilities (a‘disability access certificate’) and enablingthe building control authority to grantsuch certificate if in its opinion the designof the building or the extension of ormaterial alteration to the building inrespect of which the submission is madewould comply (subject to any relevantdispensation or relaxation already grantedunder section 4 or 5 or to any appealunder section 7 which has been allowed)with the relevant requirements of thebuilding regulations,
(x) the submission to a building control
authority of an application for a fire safetycertificate (in this Act also referred to asa ‘revised fire safety certificate’) or adisability access certificate (in this Actreferred to as a ‘revised disability accesscertificate’) if significant revision is madeto the design or works of a building or anextension of or a material alteration to abuilding in respect of which a fire safetycertificate or a disability access certificatehas been granted by a building controlauthority, and
(xi) that a new building, or an existing building
in respect of which an extension or amaterial alteration has been made, shallnot be opened, operated or occupied orpermitted to be opened, operated oroccupied—
(I) unless a fire safety certificate or
disability access certificate (or, as thecase may require, a revised certificateof either kind) or a regularisation[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
certificate required by regulations
under this Act has been granted bythe building control authority inrelation to the building, or
(II) if such an appeal is made to it, pending
the determination by An BordPleana ´la of an appeal under section 7
relating to a refusal to grant any ofthe certificates or revised certificatesreferred to in clause (I) or theattachment of conditions to any ofthem;”,
(d) in subsection (2)( b), by substituting the following for
subparagraph (i):
“(i) the form and content of—
(I) certificates of compliance,
(II) applications for fire safety certificates,
revised fire safety certificates,regularisation certificates, disabilityaccess certificates and reviseddisability access certificates,
(III) each of the certificates referred to in
clause (II),
(IV) 7 day notices and 7 day notice
statutory declarations,
(V) applications for certificates of approval
and certificates of approval,”,
(e) in subsection (2)( b)(ii), by inserting “7 day notices, 7 day
notice statutory declarations, revised fire safetycertificates, regularisation certificates, disability accesscertificates, building energy rating certificates, reviseddisability access certificates” after “fire safetycertificates,”,
(f) in subsection (2)( h)(ii), by inserting “, 7 day notices, 7 day
notice statutory declarations, revised fire safetycertificates, regularisation certificates, disability accesscertificates, revised disability access certificates” after“fire safety certificates”,
(g) in subsection (2), by inserting the following paragraph
after paragraph ( h):
“(ha) the exemption, in specified circumstances, from
fees referred to in paragraph ( h);”,
(h) in subsection (2)( k), by substituting “regulations;” for
“regulations.”,
(i) by inserting after subsection (2) the following:
“(2A) References in subsection (2)( a)(iv) to (xi) to a
material alteration of a building include references to amaterial change of use of a building and, for the purposes
11Pt.2S . 5Pt.2S . 5
Amendment of
section 7 (appeals)of Act of 1990.
Amendment of Act
of 1990 — newsections 7A and 7B.
12[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
of those provisions as they apply in relation to such a
material change of use, references in those provisions to—
(a) work,
(b) relevant works, or
(c) the design of works,
shall, in so far as they are applicable to such a material
change of use, be construed as references to—
(i) the doing of the acts that constitute the material
change of use or, as appropriate, those actswhen they are done, or
(ii) in the case of references to the design of works,
the various aspects of the material change ofuse or, as appropriate, any particular aspect ofthat change of use,
and references to construction of works and cognate
references shall be construed accordingly.”,
(j) in subsection (5), by inserting “, 7 day notice, revised fire
safety certificate, regularisation certificate, disabilityaccess certificate, revised disability access certificate”after “fire safety certificate” in both places where itoccurs in that subsection, and
(k) in subsection (6), by inserting “, 7 day notice, revised fire
safety certificate, regularisation certificate, disabilityaccess certificate, revised disability access certificate”after “fire safety certificate”.
6.—Section 7 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) in paragraph ( c), by substituting “approval, or” for
“approval,”, and
(ii) by inserting the following paragraphs after
paragraph ( c):
“(d) section 6(2)( a)(vii), for a regularisation
certificate, or
(e) section 6(2)( a)(ix), for a disability access
certificate,”,
and
(b) in subsection (3), by deleting paragraph ( c).
7.—The Act of 1990 is amended by inserting the following after
section 7:
“Fees in
respect of anappeal.7A.—(1) Subject to the approval of the
Minister, An Bord Pleana ´la (hereafter in this
section referred to as ‘the Board’) may determine[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
that fees shall be payable in relation to appeals
under section 7 and, subject to subsection (2), sucha fee so determined shall be paid to the Board bythe person making the appeal under section 7 atsuch time as the Board specifies.
(2) The power of the Board in relation to fees
referred to in subsection (1) includes a power ofthe Board—
(a) to determine that different such fees
shall be payable in respect of differentclasses of appeal under section 7,
(b) to exempt a person from the
requirement to pay any such fee insuch circumstances as it determines,and
(c) to remit or refund in whole or in part
any such fee that has been paid in suchcircumstances as it determines,
and the exercise of the power under paragraph ( b)
or (c) (as distinct from the determination of the
circumstances in which the power shall beexercisable) shall not require the approval of theMinister.
(3) The Board shall review the fees determined
under subsection (1) from time to time, but at leastevery three years, having regard to any change inthe consumer price index since the determinationof the fees for the time being in force, and mayamend the fees to reflect the results of that review,without the necessity of the Minister’s approvalunder subsection (1).
(4) For the purposes of this section, ‘change in
the consumer price index’ means the differencebetween the All Items Consumer Price IndexNumber last published by the Central StatisticsOffice before the date of the determination underthis section and the said number last publishedbefore the date of the review under subsection (3),expressed as a percentage of the last-mentionednumber.
(5) Where the Board determines or amends
fees in accordance with this section, it shall givenotice of the fees in at least one newspapercirculating in the State, not less than 8 weeksbefore the fees come into effect.
Provision with
respect toamendment ofthis Act by S.I.No. 872 of2005.7B.—The Minister shall be deemed always to
have had the power to make the regulations undersection 3 of the European Communities Act 1972entitled the ‘European Communities (EnergyPerformance of Buildings) Regulations 2005’ (S.I.No. 872 of 2005) and, accordingly—
(a) the amendment of section 3(2)
purported to have been made by those
13Pt.2S . 7Pt.2S . 7
Amendment of
section 8(enforcementnotice) of Act of1990.
Amendment of
section 9(application toDistrict Court inrelation toenforcement notice)of Act of 1990.
14[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
Regulations shall be deemed to have
been validly made and to have been inoperation as and from the date thoseRegulations were purported to havebeen made, and
(b) the Building Regulation (Amendment)
Regulations 2005 (S.I. No. 873 of 2005)made in the purported exercise of thepowers conferred by sections 3 and 18shall be deemed to have been validlymade and to have been in operation asand from the time that thoseRegulations provided that thoseRegulations were to come intooperation.”.
8.—Section 8(4) of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in paragraph ( b), by substituting “that may be required by
the notice;” for “that may be required by the notice.”,and
(b) by adding the following after paragraph ( b):
“(c) require a person on whom the notice is served
to pay to the building control authority thecosts and expenses reasonably incurred by theauthority in relation to the investigation anddetection of the matters, the subject of thenotice, the service of the notice and thepreparation and giving of any warnings beforethe service of the notice, including costsincurred in respect of the remuneration andother expenses of employees, consultants andadvisers,
and, as regards the costs and expenses referred to in
paragraph ( c), in default of their payment, the authority
may, subject to section 9 and without prejudice tosubsection (8), recover the costs and expenses as a simplecontract debt in any court of competent jurisdiction.”.
9.—Section 9 of the Act of 1990 is amended by inserting the
following after subsection (3):
“(3A) If the court makes a determination to which subsection
(3)(a)o r( b) applies, it shall, unless it is satisfied that there are
special and substantial reasons for not doing so, order theapplicant to pay to the building control authority concerned thecosts and expenses, as measured by the court, incurred by theauthority—
(a) in appearing and adducing evidence at the hearing,
including costs incurred in respect of theremuneration and other expenses of employees,consultants and advisers, and
(b) in so far as they have not been recouped pursuant
to the provision (if any) of the enforcement noticereferred to in section 8(4)( c), in relation to the[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
investigation and detection of the matters to which
the application relates, including costs incurred inrespect of remuneration and expenses as aforesaid.”.
10.—Section 12 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1) by substituting “the building control
authority concerned may apply to the High Court or theCircuit Court for an order” for “the building controlauthority concerned may apply to the High Court for anorder”,
(b) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) Where the construction of any building or works
to which building regulations apply is or has beencommenced or completed and in respect of which—
(a) a fire safety certificate, a disability access
certificate or a regularisation certificate isrequired to be granted and such construction—
(i) is or has been commenced without the fire
safety certificate, disability accesscertificate or regularisation certificatehaving been granted, or
(ii) is or has been completed without the fire
safety certificate, disability accesscertificate or regularisation certificatehaving been granted,
or
(b) an enforcement notice has not been complied
with,
the building control authority concerned may apply to the
High Court or the Circuit Court for an order requiring theremoval, alteration or making safe of any structure,service, fitting or equipment, or the discontinuance of anyworks or restricting or prohibiting the use of the buildinguntil the fire safety certificate, disability access certificateor regularisation certificate has been granted and compliedwith or the enforcement notice has been complied with.”,
(c) in subsection (2) by substituting “and where such an
application is made, the High Court or the Circuit Court,as the case may be, may” for “and when such anapplication is made, the High Court may”,
(d) by inserting the following after subsection (2):
“(2A) If the High Court or the Circuit Court makes an
order under this section providing for any of the mattersreferred to in subsection (1) or (1A), it shall, unless it issatisfied that there are special and substantial reasons fornot doing so, order the person against whom the order ismade to pay to the building authority concerned the costsand expenses, as measured by the court, incurred by theauthority—
15Pt.2S . 9
Amendment of
section 12 (order ofHigh Court inrelation to buildingsand works) of Actof 1990.Pt.2 S.10
16[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(a) in relation to the application under this section,
including costs incurred in respect of theremuneration and other expenses ofemployees, consultants and advisers, and
(b) in so far as they have not been recouped by any
other means provided under this Act, inrelation to the investigation and detection ofthe matters to which the application relatesand the preparation and giving of any warningsbefore the making of the application, includingcosts incurred in respect of remuneration andexpenses as aforesaid.”,
(e) in subsection (3) by substituting “Any order made by the
High Court or the Circuit Court under this section” for“Any order made by the High Court under thissection”, and
(f) by inserting the following after subsection (3):
“(4) ( a) An application under this section to the Circuit
Court shall be made to the judge of the CircuitCourt for the circuit in which the land which is
the subject of the application is situated.
(b) The Circuit Court shall have jurisdiction to hear
and determine an application under thissection where the market value of the landwhich is the subject of the application does notexceed \3,000,000.
(c) The Circuit Court may, for the purposes of
paragraph ( b), in relation to land that has not
been given a market value or is the subject withother land of a market value, determine thatits market value would exceed, or would notexceed, \3,000,000.
(d) Where the market value of any land which is
the subject of an application under this sectionexceeds \3,000,000, the Circuit Court shall, if
an application is made to it in that behalf byany person having an interest in theproceedings, transfer the proceedings to theHigh Court, but any order made or act donein the course of such proceedings before thetransfer shall be valid unless discharged orvaried by the High Court by order.
(e) In this subsection ‘market value’ means, in
relation to land, the price that would have beenobtained in respect of the unencumbranced feesimple were the land to have been sold on theopen market, in the year immediatelypreceding the bringing of the proceedingsconcerned, in such manner and subject to suchconditions as might reasonably be calculated tohave resulted in the vendor obtaining the bestprice for the land.”.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
11.—Section 17 of the Act of 1990 is amended—
(a) in subsections (1) and (2)( a)—
(i) by substituting “ \5,000” for “£800”, and
(ii) by substituting “ \500” for “£150”,
(b) in subsection (2)( b) by substituting “ \50,000” for
“£10,000”, and
(c) in subsection (5) by substituting “under this Act” for “to
which subsection (1) applies”.
12.—The Act of 1990 is amended by inserting the following after
section 17:
“Payment of
fines tobuildingcontrolauthority.17A.—Where a court imposes a fine or affirms
or varies a fine imposed by another court for anoffence under this Act in proceedings brought bya building control authority, it shall, on applicationof the building control authority (made before thetime of such imposition, affirmation or variation),provide by order for the payment of the amountof the fine to the building control authority andsuch payment may be enforced by the authority asif it were due to it on foot of a decree or ordermade by the court in civil proceedings.
Costs of
prosecution,etc.17B.—On convicting a person of an offence
under this Act in proceedings brought by abuilding control authority, the court shall, unlessit is satisfied that there are special and substantialgrounds for not doing so, order the person to payto the authority the costs and expenses, asmeasured by the court, incurred by the authorityin relation to the investigation, detection andprosecution of the offence, including costsincurred in respect of the remuneration and otherexpenses of employees, consultants and advisers.
Evidential
value ofelectronicallystoredinformation.17C.—In any proceedings under this Act, a
certificate issued by a building control authoritypurporting to be a printout of data stored by theauthority in electronic format or data stored inphotographic, digitised or other modern format,being, in either case, data relating to theperformance by the authority of any functionunder this Act or to any plans, documents orinformation submitted to it under this Act orregulations thereunder, shall have evidentialvalue.”.
Part 3
Registration of Architects
13.—(1) The Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland shall be the
registration body for the purposes of this Part.
17Pt.2
Amendment of
section 17(penalties) of Actof 1990.
Amendment of Act
of 1990 — newsections 17A and17B.
Registration body
and AdmissionsBoard ( Part 3 ).Pt.3 S.13
Registration of
architects.
18[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(2) For the purposes of the Directive, the registration body is the
competent authority in the State as respects architects.
(3) The registration body shall establish an Admissions Board for
the purpose of registering persons under this Part.
(4) The Admissions Board shall consist of a chairperson and 7
ordinary members, the latter appointed by the registration body asfollows:
(a) 3 architects nominated for such appointment by the
registration body;
(b) 4 persons nominated for such appointment by the
Minister, being persons who are not architects.
(5) The chairperson of the Admissions Board shall be a solicitor,
a barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister.
14.—(1) The registration body shall establish a register for
architects (the “register”).
(2) Each of the following is eligible for registration in the register:
(a) a graduate of—
(i) the National University of Ireland,
(ii) the Dublin Institute of Technology, or
(iii) such other educational body as may be prescribed,
who has received from it in any year prior to 2005 the
degree of Bachelor of Architecture or the Diploma inArchitecture of degree standard or in 2005 or anysubsequent year the degree of Bachelor of Architecture(Honours), or such other degree, diploma or otherqualification as may be prescribed and who, in eachcase—
(I) has passed a professional practice examination
specified by the body referred to in subparagraph (i),
(ii)or(iii), as the case may be, or
(II) can demonstrate that he or she has 7 years of post-
graduate experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of an architect such aswould entitle the person to seek the grant of anexemption by the body referred to in subparagraph
(i),(ii) or(iii), as appropriate, from having to
undergo the examination referred to in clause (I) ;
(b) a person who is a fellow or member of the registration
body;
(c) a person eligible for such registration by virtue of section
15or16(which relate to holders of qualifications from
other states);[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(d) a person in respect of whom a notice in writing, dated 7
January 1997, 13 March 1997 or 11 June 1997, was sent bythe Minister (whether to the person or to an organisationrepresenting the person in the matter) stating that theperson was successful in his or her application to beincluded in the relevant list;
(e) a person who has been employed in the State for at least
7 years under the supervision of an architect (who iseligible for registration under this section) and who, aspart of a social betterment scheme or part-time third levelcourse, attains a certificate or diploma of degree standardequivalent to any degree, diploma or qualificationreferred to in paragraph (a) and who has passed a
professional practice examination specified by a bodyreferred to in subparagraph (i), (ii) or(iii) of that
paragraph;
(f) a person who—
(i) has at least 7 years’ practical experience of performing
duties commensurate with those of an architect inthe State,
(ii) is at least 35 years of age, and
(iii) has passed a prescribed register admission
examination;
(g) a person (not being a person who is eligible for registration
pursuant to section 15 or16) who—
(i) has been awarded in a state other than—
(I) a Member State, or
(II) on an agreement referred to in section 15(1)(f)
being entered into and taking effect in relationto a state which is a member of the World TradeOrganisation, that state,
a degree, diploma or other qualification in
architecture, and
(ii) can demonstrate that he or she has sufficient post-
graduate experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of an architect;
(h) a person who has been assessed as eligible for registration
by the Technical Assessment Board in accordance withthe practical experience assessment procedures;
(i) an Irish citizen who as attested by a certificate of the
registration body is authorised by the registration bodyto use the title of “architect” by virtue of thedistinguished quality of his or her work in the field ofarchitecture (which authorisation the registration body isempowered, by virtue of this paragraph, to grant).
(3) The registration body may accept as sufficient compliance by
a person with subsection (2)(a)(II) a statutory declaration by the
person that he or she possesses the experience referred to in thatprovision.
19Pt.3 S.14Pt.3 S.14
Registration of
nationals fromcertain other states— main categoriesof such nationals.
20[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(4) Membership of the registration body is not a prerequisite for
registration in the register or continuance of registration but allregistered professionals are eligible for membership of theregistration body and the same fee shall be charged for registrationin the register whether or not the particular person is a member ofthe registration body.
(5) No prescribing in respect of an educational body or in respect
of any degree, diploma or other qualification that is awarded orconferred by it shall be done for the purposes of subsection (2)(a)
unless the Minister is satisfied that the course provided by the bodyleading to the award or conferral of the degree, diploma or otherqualification provides the requisite instruction in the variouselements of the discipline of architecture in accordance with Article46 of the Directive.
(6) For the purposes of the Minister satisfying himself or herself
of the foregoing matter, the Minister shall consult with the NationalQualifications Authority of Ireland or the Higher Education andTraining Awards Council as appropriate.
(7) In subsection (2)(d) “relevant list” means the list of persons
whom the Minister had proposed to certify under the terms of theamendment that the State had proposed should be made, inaccordance with the procedures under the Treaty establishing theEuropean Community, to Council Directive 85/384/EEC
2of 10 June
1985 on the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and otherevidence of formal qualifications in architecture, including measuresto facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment andfreedom to provide services.
15.—(1) In addition to the persons so eligible otherwise under this
Part, each of the following is eligible for registration in the register:
(a) a national of a Member State who holds evidence of a
formal qualification as an architect listed in Annex V,point 5.7.1 of the Directive that satisfies the minimumtraining conditions referred to in Article 46 of theDirective and which is accompanied, if appropriate, by acertificate listed in Annex V, point 5.7.1 of the Directive;
(b) a national of a Member State who holds evidence of a
formal qualification as an architect listed in Annex VI,point 6 of the Directive (whether or not it satisfies theminimum training requirements referred to in Article 46of the Directive) and which is accompanied by acertificate of the competent authority of the MemberState which issued the qualification stating that theperson was authorised to use the professional title ofarchitect, the date on which the person was so authorised(which date shall not be later than the respective datewithin the meaning of Article 49(2) of the Directive), andthat he or she has been performing duties commensuratewith those of an architect for at least 3 consecutive yearsduring the 5 years preceding the date of the award ofthe certificate;
(c) a national of a Member State who has been awarded in a
Member State a qualification that the State, pursuant toa relevant measure, is obliged to recognise as
2O.J. L223/15, 21.8.1985[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
corresponding to a qualification referred to in section
14(2) ;
(d) a national of a Member State who, as attested by a
certificate of the competent authority of his or her homeMember State, is authorised to use the title of architectby virtue of a law in that Member State that gives thatcompetent authority the power to award that title to anational of a Member State who is especiallydistinguished by the quality of his or her work in the fieldof architecture;
(e) a person who holds evidence of formal qualifications
issued by a state, other than a Member State, and whichis accompanied by a certificate issued by the competentauthority of a Member State that recognised thequalifications that the person performed dutiescommensurate with those of an architect for 3 years inthe territory of that Member State;
(f) a national or resident of a state who, by virtue of the
following agreement, is entitled to have his or herqualifications in the field of architecture recognised in theState, namely, an agreement that—
(i) is entered into between the European Union and the
World Trade Organisation, and
(ii) provides for the recognition by the states to which the
agreement relates of qualifications of a classspecified in the agreement;
(g) a national of a Member State who is not eligible for
registration in the register under any of the precedingparagraphs but who is eligible for such registration underone of the derogations to Article 46 of the Directiveprovided for in Article 47 of the Directive as follows,namely—
(i) by the person’s obtaining training existing as of 5
August 1985 provided by ‘Fachochschulen’ in theFederal Republic of Germany over a period of 3years, followed by, as attested by a certificate of theprofessional association in whose roll the personappears, a 4 year period during which he or sheperformed duties commensurate with those of anarchitect, or
(ii) by the person’s having—
(I) been employed for not less than 7 years under
the supervision of an architect who is eligible forregistration under this Part, or who is registeredin the register,
(II) as part of a social betterment scheme or part-time
third level course, attained a certificate ordiploma of university standard, and
(III) passed a professional practice examination in a
Member State.
21Pt.3 S.15Pt.3 S.15
Further category of
nationals fromcertain other stateswho are eligible forregistration.
22[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(2) The entry of a person’s name in the register pursuant to
subsection (1) (other than paragraph (f) thereof) may be subject to
the Admissions Board being satisfied that the person applying forregistration pursuant to that subsection has a knowledge of languagenecessary for practising architecture in the State.
(3) In relation to an application for registration pursuant to
subsection (1) (other than paragraph (f)thereof), the Admissions
Board may seek verification of documents furnished to it inaccordance with Article 50 of the Directive.
(4) A person who is registered pursuant to subsection (1) (other
than paragraph (f) thereof) or section 16 shall use the professional
title — “architect”.
(5) The Admissions Board shall make a decision on whether or
not to register an applicant pursuant to subsection (1) (other than
paragraph (f) thereof) as quickly as possible and, in any event, within
3 months after the date of submission of the completeddocumentation by the applicant to the Board.
(6) So much of the provisions of this section or section 16 as have
effect in cases where—
(a) the person concerned is a national of a Member State,
(b) any act or thing is done or awarded or issued in, or by a
competent authority of, a Member State, or
(c) a matter is provided under the law of a Member State,
shall, to the extent that the terms of those provisions would prevent
the equal treatment or recognition mentioned in subsection (7) being
accorded to the person mentioned in that subsection, be read subjectto such modifications as will allow that equal treatment orrecognition to be accorded to that person.
(7) ( a) The equal treatment mentioned in subsection (6) is the
equal treatment of a family member (within the meaningof Directive 2004/38 of the European Parliament and ofthe Council of 29 April 2004) of a national of a MemberState required by Article 24(1) of that Directive.
(b) The recognition mentioned in subsection (6) is the
recognition required by Article 27 of Council Directive2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 of qualifications of a personwho is a beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protectionstatus (within the meaning of that Directive).
16.—(1) A person who wishes to be registered by virtue of
satisfying conditions for recognition of his or her qualifications underChapter I of Title III of the Directive may apply to the AdmissionsBoard for a decision that he or she is eligible to be registered inpursuance of this section.
(2) A person who makes an application under this section shall
submit the following to the Admissions Board:
(a) an attestation of competence issued by another Member
State in relation to that person;
(b) evidence of formal qualifications;[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(c) where appropriate, evidence that the person has, on a full
time basis, performed duties commensurate with those ofan architect for not less than 2 years during the previous10 years.
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Directive, the Admissions
Board may request additional information to be submitted by theapplicant within a specified period and may require the applicant toappear for an interview if it considers it necessary.
(4) Where an interview is required, at least 4 members of the
Admissions Board shall be present for the interview.
(5) The interview shall be recorded in writing or in such other
form as the Admissions Board may decide, and additionalinformation may, subsequent to the interview, be required to besubmitted by the applicant to those who conducted the interview.
(6) An applicant may be accompanied at the interview by a
professional advisor, including a lawyer, but any expense incurred bythe applicant in being so accompanied shall be borne by theapplicant.
(7) In relation to an application under this section, the
Admissions Board may seek verification of documents furnished toit in accordance with Article 50 of the Directive.
(8) ( a) The Admissions Board may require, in accordance with
Article 14 of the Directive, that a person who makes anapplication under this section shall complete an
adaptation period of up to 3 years or take an aptitudetest.
(b) For that purpose, the Admissions Board shall serve a
notice on the applicant stating that—
(i) the applicant may opt to complete an adaptation
period or take an aptitude test (and thosealternatives are referred to in subparagraph (iii) as
the “2 alternatives”),
(ii) if it is an adaptation period the applicant opts to
complete, that period shall be of a duration specifiedin the notice,
(iii) if the applicant fails to opt as between the 2
alternatives (and notify, in writing, his or herdecision in that regard to the Board within a periodspecified for that purpose in the notice), the Boardshall determine whether to require the applicant tocomplete an adaptation period or take an aptitudetest (and, if it is an adaptation period the Boarddetermines that it shall require the applicant tocomplete, the duration of that period shall be thesame as the duration stated in the notice for thepurposes of subparagraph (ii) ), and
(iv) if the applicant fails, having been registered pursuant
to this section, to complete successfully anadaptation period or take and pass an aptitude testwhich, by virtue of the Directive and this section—
23Pt.3 S.16Pt.3 S.16
24[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(I) he or she has opted to complete or take and
pass, or
(II) the Admissions Board has required him or her to
complete or take and pass,
the applicant’s name shall be erased from the
register.
(9) The Admissions Board shall satisfy itself that the person who
makes an application under this section has a knowledge of languagenecessary for practising architecture in the State.
(10) Where the Admissions Board decides—
(a) that the applicant is eligible for registration in the register
pursuant to this section, it shall take the necessary stepsto register the applicant on payment of any applicableregistration fee, or
(b) that—
(i) the applicant is not eligible for registration in the
register pursuant to this section, or
(ii) without prejudice to subsection (8) , the applicant
should obtain a knowledge of language necessary forpractising architecture in the State,
the chairperson shall immediately send a notice in writing
to the applicant, by prepaid registered post to the addressof the applicant as furnished in his or her application,advising the applicant of the decision, the date on whichit was made and the reasons for it.
(11) The Admissions Board shall make a decision on whether or
not a person is eligible for registration in the register pursuant to thissection as quickly as possible and, in any event (but subject tosubsection (12) ), within 3 months after the date of submission of the
completed documentation by the applicant to the Board.
(12) If in the particular circumstances of the matter the
Admissions Board determines that it is not practicable for it to makethe decision referred to in subsection (11) within the period referred
to in that subsection it may, by notice in writing sent, by prepaidregistered post, to the applicant, extend that period once or morethan once (but the period or the aggregate of the periods of suchextension shall not be more than one month).
(13) ( a) If it appears to the Admissions Board that a person who
is registered in the register pursuant to this section—
(i) has, in a case where subsection (8) applies, failed to
complete successfully an adaptation period or takeand pass an aptitude test, as the case may be,mentioned in that subsection, or
(ii) has, in a case where subsection (10)(b)(ii) applies,
failed to obtain the knowledge of languagementioned in that provision,
the Admissions Board shall decide that the name of the
person shall be erased from the register.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(b) If the Admissions Board makes such a decision, it shall
direct the Registrar to erase the name of the person fromthe register; on erasing the name of the person from theregister, the Registrar shall forthwith send by prepaidregistered post to such person, at the person’s address asstated in the register, notice in writing of the erasure.
17.—(1) A person applying for registration under this Part shall,
at the time of applying, pay the specified fee to the registration bodyand, in addition, as a condition of continuing to be registered, pay aspecified annual fee on a date as may be specified by theregistration body.
(2) Where the Registrar has twice sent a notice by prepaid
registered post to a registered professional’s address as given in theregister, requesting payment of the annual fee the Registrar may, ifthe person has not paid the fee within 2 months after sending thesecond notice, remove the person’s name from the register andthereupon shall send a notice by prepaid registered post informingthe person that he or she is no longer registered.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) , the Registrar may, in cases of
verified hardship, waive the requirement to pay a fee under thissection, direct that a fee of an amount lesser than the specifiedamount may be paid for the purposes of this section or remit a feepaid under this section, in whole or in part.
(4) Where a person’s name has been removed from the register
for non-payment of fees and the person pays the outstanding feestogether with any other specified fees, the Registrar shall re-enterthe person’s name in the register and it shall be treated as havingbeen re-entered on the date it was removed.
18.—(1) Subject to s ubsections (3) and (4), a person who—
(a) not being registered under this Part, uses the title
“architect”, either alone or in combination with any otherwords or letters, or name, title or description, implyingthat the person is so registered,
(b) with intent to deceive, makes use of a certificate issued
under this Part to such person or any other person,
(c) makes or causes to be made, any false declaration or
misrepresentation for the purpose of obtainingregistration under this Part, or aids or abets such action,or
(d) practises or carries on business under any name, style or
title containing the word “architect”, unless he or she isregistered under this Part,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary
conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 12 months or both.
(2) If the contravention in respect of which a person is convicted
of an offence under subsection (1) is continued after the conviction,
the person shall be guilty of a further offence on every day on whichthe contravention continues and for each such offence the personshall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \500.
25Pt.3 S.16
Fees ( Part 3 ).
Prohibition against
using term“architect” unlessregistered.Pt.3 S.18
26[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent a body corporate, firm or
partnership from carrying on business under a name, style or titlecontaining the word “architect” if—
(a) the business, so far as it relates to architecture, is under the
control and management of a registered professional, and
(b) in all premises where its business relating to architecture
is carried on, it is by or under the supervision of aregistered professional.
(4) The use by a person of the words—
(a) “landscape architect”,
(b) “naval architect”,
(c) “architectural technician”,
(d) “architectural technologist”,
(e) “interior design architect”, or
(f) such other words as may be prescribed,
to describe himself or herself does not, in and of itself, constitute a
contravention of subsection (1) .
(5) Paragraph (a) or(d)ofsubsection (1) shall not apply to a
person who has—
(a) applied for registration under this Part and in respect of
whom the Admissions Board or the TechnicalAssessment Board, as the case may be, has not made adecision on that application (and the person has notwithdrawn that application to the board concerned),
(b) appealed to the Appeals Board against a decision of the
Admissions Board or the Technical Assessment Boardon an application referred to in paragraph (a) and in
respect of whom the Appeals Board has not made adecision on that appeal (and the person has notwithdrawn that appeal to the Appeals Board), or
(c) appealed to the High Court against a decision of the
Appeals Board referred to in paragraph (b) and in
respect of whom the High Court has not made a decisionon that appeal (and the person has not withdrawn thatappeal to the High Court).
(6) The registration body may by rules provide that subsection (3)
shall not apply in relation to a body corporate, firm or partnershipunless it has provided to the registration body such information,necessary for determining whether that subsection applies, as maybe provided for in such rules.
(7) For the purposes of this section, a person is not to be regarded
as not practising by reason only of that person being in theemployment of another person.
(8) In this section, “business” includes any undertaking which is
carried on for fee or reward or in the course of which services areprovided otherwise than free of charge.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
19.—(1) The registration body shall appoint a Registrar to be
responsible for keeping the register under this Part.
(2) The registration body, in addition to paying the Registrar a
salary or fee, may pay a pension to the Registrar or makecontributions to the payment of a pension, and may pay the Registrarallowances and expenses.
(3) The register shall be in such form, including electronic,
photographic or other form, as the registration body decides.
(4) Where a person has applied for registration in accordance with
this Part, if the Admissions Board is satisfied that the person isentitled to be registered, the Registrar shall enter the person’s namein the register.
(5) Where a person’s name is entered in the register, the Registrar
shall send to the person a certificate stating that the person isregistered.
(6) Where a person receives a certificate under subsection (5) , the
person shall forthwith cause the certificate to be displayed at theplace where the person practises architecture at all times duringwhich his or her registration continues, but not otherwise.
(7) The Registrar shall ensure the register is kept up to date and
shall make it available for inspection at the office of the Registrarduring normal working hours.
(8) A registered professional shall notify the Registrar of any
change in the name under which or the address at which he or shecarries on business.
20.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , a registered professional may
apply to the Registrar to have his or her name removed from theregister and, on receipt of the application and on payment of thespecified fee, the Registrar shall remove it.
(2) A person whose name has been removed from the register
may apply to the Registrar to have his or her name restored to theregister and, on application and payment of the specified fee, butsubject to any conditions imposed by the Admissions Board withrespect to such restoration, the Registrar shall restore it to theregister.
(3) Where a complaint is being investigated by the Professional
Conduct Committee under Part 6 in relation to a person, no
application shall be entertained by the Registrar to remove theperson’s name from the register until the investigation has beencompleted and the Committee has decided what action to take.
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent a Professional Conduct
Committee from refusing to restore a person’s name to the registeron the grounds of unfitness to practise architecture or attachingconditions to such restoration.
(5) Where the Professional Conduct Committee decides to refuse
to so restore a person’s name or decides to attach conditions to suchrestoration, the Registrar shall forthwith send a notice to the personby prepaid registered post to the last address given in the register
27Pt.3
Registrar ( Part 3 ).
Removal from
register ( Part 3 ).Pt.3 S.20
Technical
Assessment Board(Part 3 ).
Technical
Assessment Boardprocedure ( Part 3 ).
28[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
informing the person of the decision, the date on which it was made
and the reasons for it.
21.—(1) The registration body shall establish a Technical
Assessment Board to consider applications for registration in theregister from persons who do not fall within any of paragraphs (a)
to(g)and (i)ofsection 14(2) .
(2) The Technical Assessment Board shall consist of a
chairperson and 7 ordinary members, the latter appointed by theregistration body as follows:
(a) 3 architects nominated for such appointment by the
registration body;
(b) 4 persons nominated for such appointment by the
Minister, being persons who are not architects.
(3) The chairperson of the Technical Assessment Board shall be
a solicitor, a barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, HighCourt or Supreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson bythe Minister.
(4) The Technical Assessment Board shall establish a panel of
architects being architects who the Board considers possess therequisite expertise for the purpose of performing the functionsassigned to members of the panel under subsection (5) .
(5) The Technical Assessment Board shall, in respect of each
application under section 22 , appoint not less than 3 of the members
of the panel established under subsection (4) to—
(a) examine the documents furnished to the Board under
subsection (2) of that section (and any additional
information furnished to it under subsection (3) of that
section),
(b) interview the applicant, and
(c) give to the Board their opinion as to whether the applicant
is eligible for registration pursuant to that section.
22.—(1) The following person may apply to the Technical
Assessment Board for a decision that he or she is eligible to beregistered in the register pursuant to this section, namely, a personwho has been performing duties commensurate with those of anarchitect for a period of 10 or more years in the State (but no periodof such performance that occurs on or after the commencement ofthis section shall be reckoned for the purposes of this subsection).
(2) A person who makes an application under this section shall
submit the following to the Technical Assessment Board:
(a) a curriculum vitae providing details of the work carried
out by the applicant in the field of architecture during theperiod referred to in subsection (1) ;
(b) information on projects for each year of that period for
which the applicant was responsible, declarations as tothe authorship of the projects and all documentationnecessary to support the information;[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(c) a file containing at least 4 projects, including graphic
material, for which the applicant was responsible, beingprojects that the applicant considers are the most suitablefor the purposes of the consideration of his or herapplication;
(d) such independent verification, as the Technical
Assessment Board may reasonably require, of thedocumentation submitted under this subsection.
(3) The Technical Assessment Board may request additional
information to be submitted by the applicant within a specifiedperiod and may require the applicant to appear for an interview if itconsiders it necessary; such an interview shall be in addition to theinterview conducted by the members of the panel referred to insection 21(5) (which latter interview is subsequently referred to in
this section as the “panel interview”).
(4) Where an interview under this section is required, at least 4
members of the Technical Assessment Board shall be present forthe interview.
(5) The panel interview and any interview under this section shall
each be recorded in writing or in such other form as the members ofthe panel concerned or the Technical Assessment Board, asappropriate, may decide, and additional information may,subsequent to the interview, be required to be submitted by theapplicant to those who conducted the interview.
(6) An applicant may be accompanied at the panel interview and
any interview under this section by a professional advisor, includinga lawyer, but any expense incurred by the applicant in being soaccompanied shall be borne by the applicant.
(7) The Technical Assessment Board shall use the following
criteria in assessing an application under this section:
(a) whether or not for the period referred to in subsection (1) ,
the applicant had been performing duties commensuratewith those of an architect;
(b) whether or not the work submitted was equivalent to the
work of an architect, having regard to its scale,complexity and quality;
(c) whether or not the applicant can demonstrate that he or
she has acquired the competencies specified in Article 46of the Directive;
(d) whether or not the work submitted had been realised by
the applicant, and, if the applicant was not totallyresponsible, what level of responsibility by the applicantfor the work could be established,
and, in addition, shall have regard to the opinion of the architects
referred to in section 21(5) as to whether the applicant is eligible for
registration pursuant to this section (but that opinion shall not bebinding on the Board).
(8) Where the Technical Assessment Board decides—
(a) that the applicant is eligible for registration in the register
pursuant to this section, the chairperson shall advise the
29Pt.3 S.22Pt.3 S.22
Professional
Conduct Committee(Part 3 ).
Appeals Board
(Part 3 ).
30[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
Admissions Board which shall take the necessary steps
to register the applicant on payment of any applicableregistration fee, or
(b) that the applicant is not eligible for registration in the
register pursuant to this section, the chairperson shallimmediately send a notice in writing to the applicant, byprepaid registered post to the address of the applicant asfurnished in his or her application, advising the applicantof the decision, the date on which it was made and thereasons for it.
23.—(1) The registration body shall establish a Professional
Conduct Committee (the “Committee”).
(2) The Committee shall consist of a chairperson and 11 ordinary
members, the latter appointed by the registration body as follows:
(a) 5 architects nominated for such appointment by the
registration body;
(b) 6 persons who are not architects—
(i) 5 of whom are nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, and
(ii) one of whom is nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment.
(3) The chairperson of the Committee shall be a solicitor, a
barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment.
24.—(1) The registration body shall establish an Appeals Board.
(2) The Appeals Board shall consist of a chairperson and 5
ordinary members, the latter appointed by the registration body asfollows:
(a) 2 architects nominated for such appointment by the
registration body, neither of whom shall be a member ofany other Board or Committee established under thisPart;
(b) 3 persons who are not architects—
(i) 2 of whom are nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, and
(ii) one of whom is nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment,
none of whom shall be a member of any other Board or
Committee established under this Part.
(3) The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall be a solicitor, a
barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court or[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
Supreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by the
Minister.
25.—(1) A person adversely affected by a decision of the
Admissions Board, the Technical Assessment Board or theProfessional Conduct Committee may appeal to the Appeals Boardagainst the decision.
(2) An appeal shall be in writing and lodged with the Appeals
Board within 3 months after the date of the decision beingappealed against.
(3) The appeal shall specify the decision to which the appeal
relates and the grounds on which the appeal rests.
(4) An appeal may be based on either procedural or substantive
matters.
(5) A person may, at any time before the appeal is heard,
withdraw the appeal in whole or in part by notifying the AppealsBoard in writing of the withdrawal.
(6) A witness at a hearing conducted by the Appeals Board has
the same immunities and privileges as if he or she were a witnessbefore the High Court.
(7) The chairperson of the Appeals Board may—
(a) direct in writing an appellant to attend before the Appeals
Board on a date and at a time and place specified in thedirection,
(b) direct in writing any other person whose evidence the
Appeals Board may require, to attend before theAppeals Board on a date and at a time and placespecified in the direction, and may direct the person tobring any document in the person’s possession relating tothe appeal,
(c) request the relevant Board or Committee whose decision
is being appealed against to produce any documents inits possession relating to the appeal, together with itsobservations on the appeal,
(d) give any other direction for the purpose of the proceedings
that appears to the chairperson to be fair and reasonable.
(8) The procedures of the Appeals Board shall make provision
for—
(a) notifying the appellant and the chairperson of the relevant
Board or Committee of the date, time and place of thesitting of the Appeals Board,
(b) advising the appellant of the appellant’s right—
(i) to be present at the Appeals Board’s sitting, and
(ii) to present his or her case in person or, at his or her
own expense, through a legal representative,
(c) the examination of witnesses,
31Pt.3 S.24
Appeals procedure
(Part 3 ).Pt.3 S.25
Appeal to High
Court from decisionof Appeals Board(Part 3 ).
32[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(d) determination by the Appeals Board as to whether or not
evidence should be given under oath,
(e) recording of proceedings.
(9) On the hearing of an appeal under this section, the Appeals
Board may—
(a) confirm the decision of the relevant Board or Committee,
subject to any amendment thereof the Appeals Boardthinks fit,
(b) annul the decision and direct the relevant Board or
Committee to make a new decision, or
(c) give such other directions as it thinks fit.
(10) The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall notify—
(a) the appellant in writing, sent by prepaid registered post to
the appellant’s stated address, of the decision taken onthe appeal, the date on which it was made and thereasons for it, and shall also advise the appellant of theright to appeal to the High Court against the AppealBoard’s decision,
(b) the relevant Board or Committee against whose decision
the appeal was made of the decision taken on the appeal,the date on which it was made and the reasons for it,
(c) where the appellant was the person who had lodged the
complaint with the Professional Conduct Committeeunder Part 6 , the registered architect in respect of whom
the complaint was made, stating the decision taken on theappeal, the date on which it was made and the reasons forit.
26.—(1) A person adversely affected by a decision of the Appeals
Board may, within 3 months after the date of such decision, appealto the High Court against the decision.
(2) On the hearing of an appeal under this section, the Court
may—
(a) confirm the decision of the Appeals Board, subject to any
amendment thereof the Court thinks fit,
(b) annul the decision and direct the Appeals Board to make
a new decision, or
(c) give such other directions as the Court thinks fit,
and the Court may direct how the costs of the appeal are to be borne.
(3) On the hearing of an appeal under this section from a decision
of the Appeals Board relating to a decision of the ProfessionalConduct Committee, the High Court may admit evidence of anyperson of standing in the architectural profession as to whatconstitutes professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
27.—(1) If the Admissions Board fails to make a decision—
(a) referred to in subsection (5) ofsection 15 within the period
specified in that subsection, or
(b) referred to in subsection (11) ofsection 16 within—
(i) unless subparagraph (ii) applies, the period specified
in that subsection, or
(ii) if that period has been extended under subsection (12)
ofsection 16 , the period of that extension (or, if that
period has been extended more than once under thatsubsection (12) , the last period of such extension),
the applicant referred to in section 15 or16may make a complaint
to the Appeals Board that such a failure has occurred.
(2) On the hearing of such a complaint and having given the
Admissions Board an opportunity to be heard, the Appeals Boardmay, as it thinks appropriate—
(a) give a direction to the Admissions Board to make the
decision concerned forthwith, or
(b) make itself a decision on the application concerned
referred to in section 15 or16(and where the Appeals
Board does so section 26 shall apply to such a decision as
it applies to any other decision of the Appeals Board).
PART 4
Registration of Quantity Surveyors
28.—(1) The Society of Chartered Surveyors shall be the
registration body for the purposes of this Part.
(2) For the purposes of the Directive, the registration body is the
competent authority in the State as respects quantity surveyors.
(3) The registration body shall establish an Admissions Board for
the purpose of registering persons under this Part.
(4) The Admissions Board shall consist of a chairperson and 7
ordinary members, the latter appointed by the registration body asfollows:
(a) 3 quantity surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c), (e) and (f)of
section 29(2) ;
(b) 4 persons nominated for such appointment by the
Minister, being persons who are not quantity surveyors.
(5) The chairperson of the Admissions Board shall be a solicitor,
a barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister.
33Pt.3
Certain other
jurisdiction ofAppeals Board(Part 3 ).
Registration body
and AdmissionsBoard ( Part 4 ).Pt.4
Registration of
quantity surveyors.
34[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
29.—(1) The registration body shall establish a register for
quantity surveyors (the “register”).
(2) Each of the following is eligible for registration in the register:
(a) a graduate of—
(i) the Dublin Institute of Technology,
(ii) the Limerick Institute of Technology, or
(iii) such other educational body as may be prescribed,
who has received from it—
(I) in any year prior to 2005, a diploma called the
Construction Economic Diploma or a degree ofBachelor of Science in Quantity Surveying,
(II) in 2005 or any subsequent year, an Honours degree
of Bachelor of Science in Construction Economicsand Management or an Honours degree of Bachelorof Science in Construction Economics (QuantitySurveying), or
(III) such other degree, diploma or qualification as may
be prescribed,
and who, in each case, has at least 2 years appropriate
experience of performing duties commensurate withthose of a quantity surveyor;
(b) a fellow or associate of the Society of Chartered
Surveyors, Quantity Surveying Division;
(c) a fellow or member of the Chartered Institute of Building,
who has at least 3 years practical experience ofperforming duties commensurate with those of aquantity surveyor;
(d) a former fellow or member of the Architecture and
Surveying Institute, Quantity Surveying Section (nowmerged with the Chartered Institute of Building), whohas at least 5 years practical experience of performingduties commensurate with those of a quantity surveyor;
(e) a fellow or member of the Association of Building
Engineers, Quantity Surveying Section, who has at least5 years practical experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of a quantity surveyor;
(f) a fellow or member of the Institution of Civil Engineering
Surveyors who has at least 5 years practical experienceof performing duties commensurate with those of aquantity surveyor;
(g) a person who on or after 1 January 2001 and prior to 2005
attained a degree of Bachelor of Science in QuantitySurveying or in 2005 or any subsequent year an Honoursdegree of Bachelor of Science in Construction Economics(Quantity Surveying) and is enrolled as a fellow ormember of the Chartered Institute of Building, theArchitecture and Surveying Institute, the Association of[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
Building Engineers or the Institution of Civil Engineering
Surveyors and who, in each case, has at least 3 yearspractical experience of performing duties commensuratewith those of a quantity surveyor;
(h) a person eligible for such registration by virtue of section
30(which relates to holders of qualifications from other
states);
(i) a national or resident of a state who, by virtue of the
following agreement, is entitled to have his or herqualifications in the field of quantity surveyingrecognised in the State, namely, an agreement that—
(i) is entered into between the European Union and the
World Trade Organisation, and
(ii) provides for the recognition by the states to which the
agreement relates of qualifications of a classspecified in the agreement;
(j) a national of a Member State who has been awarded in a
Member State a qualification that the State, pursuant toa relevant measure, is obliged to recognise ascorresponding to a qualification referred to inparagraph (a) ;
(k) a person (not being a person who is eligible for registration
pursuant to section 30 ) who—
(i) has been awarded in a state, other than a Member
State or a state which is a member of the WorldTrade Organisation, a degree, diploma or otherqualification in quantity surveying, and
(ii) can demonstrate that he or she has sufficient post-
graduate experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of a quantity surveyor;
(l) a person who has been assessed as eligible for registration
by the Technical Assessment Board in accordance withthe practical experience assessment procedures.
(3) Membership of the registration body is not a prerequisite for
registration in the register or continuance of registration and thesame fee shall be charged for registration in the register whether ornot the particular person is a member of the registration body.
(4) No prescribing in respect of an educational body or in respect
of any degree, diploma or other qualification that is awarded orconferred by it shall be done for the purposes of subsection (2)(a)
unless the Minister is satisfied that the course provided by the bodyleading to the award or conferral of the degree, diploma or otherqualification provides the requisite instruction in the variouselements of the discipline of quantity surveying.
(5) For the purposes of the Minister satisfying himself or herself
of the foregoing matter, the Minister shall consult with the NationalQualifications Authority of Ireland or the Higher Education andTraining Awards Council as appropriate.
35Pt.4 S.29Pt.4
Nationals from
other states eligiblefor registration(Part 4 ).
36[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
30.—(1) A person who wishes to be registered by virtue of
satisfying conditions for recognition of his or her qualifications underChapter I of Title III of the Directive may apply to the AdmissionsBoard for a decision that he or she is eligible to be registered inpursuance of this section.
(2) A person who makes an application under this section shall
submit the following to the Admissions Board:
(a) an attestation of competence issued by another Member
State in relation to that person;
(b) evidence of formal qualifications;
(c) where appropriate, evidence that the person has, on a full
time basis, performed duties commensurate with those ofa quantity surveyor for not less than 2 years during theprevious 10 years.
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Directive, the Admissions
Board may request additional information to be submitted by theapplicant within a specified period and may require the applicant toappear for an interview if it considers it necessary.
(4) Where an interview is required, at least 4 members of the
Admissions Board shall be present for the interview.
(5) The interview shall be recorded in writing or in such other
form as the Admissions Board may decide, and additionalinformation may, subsequent to the interview, be required to besubmitted by the applicant to those who conducted the interview.
(6) An applicant may be accompanied at the interview by a
professional advisor, including a lawyer, but any expense incurred bythe applicant in being so accompanied shall be borne by theapplicant.
(7) In relation to an application under this section, the
Admissions Board may seek independent verification of documentsfurnished to it in accordance with Article 50 of the Directive.
(8) ( a) The Admissions Board may require, in accordance with
Article 14 of the Directive, that a person who makes anapplication under this section shall complete anadaptation period of up to 3 years or take an aptitudetest.
(b) For that purpose, the Admissions Board shall serve a
notice on the applicant stating that—
(i) the applicant may opt to complete an adaptation
period or take an aptitude test (and thosealternatives are referred to in subparagraph (iii) as
the “2 alternatives”),
(ii) if it is an adaptation period the applicant opts to
complete, that period shall be of a duration specifiedin the notice,
(iii) if the applicant fails to opt as between the 2
alternatives (and notify, in writing, his or herdecision in that regard to the Board within a periodspecified for that purpose in the notice), the Board[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
shall determine whether to require the applicant to
complete an adaptation period or take an aptitudetest (and, if it is an adaptation period the Boarddetermines that it shall require the applicant tocomplete, the duration of that period shall be thesame as the duration stated in the notice for thepurposes of subparagraph (ii) ), and
(iv) if the applicant fails, having been registered pursuant
to this section, to complete successfully anadaptation period or take and pass an aptitude testwhich, by virtue of the Directive and this section—
(I) he or she has opted to complete or take and
pass, or,
(II) the Admissions Board requires him or her to
complete or take and pass,
the applicant’s name shall be erased from the
register.
(9) The Admissions Board shall satisfy itself that the person who
makes an application under this section has a knowledge of languagenecessary for practising quantity surveying in the State.
(10) Where the Admissions Board decides—
(a) that the applicant is eligible for registration in the register
pursuant to this section, it shall take the necessary stepsto register the applicant on payment of any applicableregistration fee, or
(b) that—
(i) the applicant is not eligible for registration in the
register pursuant to this section, or
(ii) without prejudice to subsection (8) , the applicant
should obtain a knowledge of language necessary forpractising quantity surveying in the State,
the chairperson shall immediately send a notice in writing
to the applicant, by prepaid registered post to the addressof the applicant as furnished in his or her application,advising the applicant of the decision, the date on whichit was made and the reasons for it.
(11) A person who is registered pursuant to this section shall—
(a) use the professional title — “quantity surveyor”, and
(b) unless he or she is a member of a body referred to in
Annex 1 of the Directive, not expressly represent, orimply by use of any words or letters, that he or she is amember of that body.
(12) The Admissions Board shall make a decision on whether or
not a person is eligible for registration in the register pursuant to thissection as quickly as possible, and in any event (but subject tosubsection (13) ), within 3 months after the date of submission of the
completed documentation by the applicant to the Board.
37Pt.4 S.30Pt.4 S.30
Fees ( Part 4 ).
38[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(13) If in the particular circumstances of the matter the
Admissions Board determines that it is not practicable for it to makethe decision referred to in subsection (12) within the period referred
to in that subsection it may, by notice in writing sent, by prepaidregistered post, to the applicant, extend that period once or morethan once (but the period or the aggregate of the periods of suchextension shall not be more than one month).
(14) ( a) If it appears to the Admissions Board that a person who
is registered in the register pursuant to this section—
(i) has, in a case where subsection (8) applies, failed to
complete successfully an adaptation period or takeand pass an aptitude test, as the case may be,mentioned in that subsection, or
(ii) has, in a case where subsection (10)(b)(ii) applies,
failed to obtain the knowledge of languagementioned in that provision,
the Admissions Board shall decide that the name of the
person shall be erased from the register.
(b) If the Admissions Board makes such a decision, it shall
direct the Registrar to erase the name of the person fromthe register; on erasing the name of the person from theregister, the Registrar shall forthwith send by prepaidregistered post to such person, at the person’s address asstated in the register, notice in writing of the erasure.
(15) So much of the provisions of this section as have effect in
cases where—
(a) the person concerned is a national of a Member State,
(b) any act or thing is done or awarded or issued in, or by a
competent authority of a Member State, or
(c) a matter is provided under the law of a Member State,
shall, to the extent that the terms of these provisions would prevent
the equal treatment or recognition mentioned in subsection (16)
being accorded to the person mentioned in that subsection, be readsubject to such modifications as will allow that equal treatment orrecognition to be accorded to that person.
(16) ( a) The equal treatment mentioned in subsection (15) is the
equal treatment of a family member (within the meaningof Directive 2004/38 of the European Parliament and ofthe Council of 29 April 2004) of a national of a MemberState required by Article 42(1) of that Directive.
(b) The recognition mentioned in subsection (15) is the
recognition required by Article 27 of Council Directive2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 of qualifications of a personwho is a beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protectionstatus (within the meaning of that Directive).
31.—(1) A person applying for registration under this Part shall,
at the time of applying, pay the specified fee to the registration bodyand, in addition, as a condition of continuing to be registered, pay a[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
specified annual fee on a date as may be specified by the
registration body.
(2) Where the Registrar has twice sent a notice by prepaid
registered post to a registered professional’s address as given in theregister, requesting payment of the annual fee the Registrar may, ifthe person has not paid the fee within 2 months after sending thesecond notice, remove the person’s name from the register andthereupon shall send a notice by prepaid registered post informingthe person that he or she is no longer registered.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) , the Registrar may, in cases of
verified hardship, waive the requirement to pay a fee under thissection, direct that a fee of an amount lesser than the specifiedamount may be paid for the purposes of this section or remit a feepaid under this section, in whole or in part.
(4) Where a person’s name has been removed from the register
for non-payment of fees and the person pays the outstanding feestogether with any other specified fees, the Registrar shall re-enterthe person’s name in the register and it shall be treated as havingbeen re-entered on the date it was removed.
32.—(1) A person who—
(a) not being registered under this Part, uses the title
“quantity surveyor”, either alone or in combination withany other words or letters, or name, title or description,implying that the person is so registered,
(b) with intent to deceive, makes use of a certificate issued
under this Part to such person or any other person,
(c) makes or causes to be made, any false declaration or
misrepresentation for the purpose of obtainingregistration under this Part, or aids or abets such action,
or
(d) practises or carries on business under any name, style or
title containing the words “quantity surveyor”, unless heor she is registered under this Part,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary
conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 12 months or both.
(2) If the contravention in respect of which a person is convicted
of an offence under subsection (1) is continued after the conviction,
the person shall be guilty of a further offence on every day on whichthe contravention continues and for each such offence the personshall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \500.
(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent a body corporate, firm or
partnership from carrying on business under a name, style or titlecontaining the words “quantity surveyor” if—
(a) the business, so far as it relates to quantity surveying, is
under the control and management of a registeredprofessional, and
39Pt.4 S.31
Prohibition against
using term“quantity surveyor”unless registered.Pt.4 S.32
Registrar ( Part 4 ).
40[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(b) in all premises where its business relating to quantity
surveying is carried on, it is by or under the supervisionof a registered professional.
(4) Paragraph (a) or(d)ofsubsection (1) shall not apply to a
person who has—
(a) applied for registration under this Part and in respect of
whom the Admissions Board or the TechnicalAssessment Board, as the case may be, has not made adecision on that application (and the person has notwithdrawn that application to the board concerned),
(b) appealed to the Appeals Board against a decision of the
Admissions Board or the Technical Assessment Boardon an application referred to in paragraph (a) and in
respect of whom the Appeals Board has not made adecision on that appeal (and the person has notwithdrawn that appeal to the Appeals Board), or
(c) appealed to the High Court against a decision of the
Appeals Board referred to in paragraph (b) and in
respect of whom the High Court has not made a decisionon that appeal (and the person has not withdrawn thatappeal to the High Court).
(5) The registration body may by rules provide that subsection (3)
shall not apply in relation to a body corporate, firm or partnershipunless it has provided to the registration body such information,necessary for determining whether that subsection applies, as maybe provided for in such rules.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person is not to be regarded
as not practising by reason only of that person being in theemployment of another person.
(7) In this section, “business” includes any undertaking which is
carried on for fee or reward or in the course of which services areprovided otherwise than free of charge.
33.—(1) The registration body shall appoint a Registrar to be
responsible for keeping the register under this Part.
(2) The registration body, in addition to paying the Registrar a
salary or fee, may pay a pension to the Registrar or makecontributions to the payment of a pension, and may pay the Registrarallowances and expenses.
(3) The register shall be in such form, including electronic,
photographic or other form, as the registration body decides.
(4) Where a person has applied for registration in accordance with
this Part, if the Admissions Board is satisfied that the person isentitled to be registered, the Registrar shall enter the person’s namein the register.
(5) Where a person’s name is entered in the register, the Registrar
shall send to the person a certificate stating that the person isregistered.
(6) Where a person receives a certificate under subsection (5) , the
person shall forthwith cause the certificate to be displayed at the[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
place where the person practises quantity surveying at all times
during which his or her registration continues, but not otherwise.
(7) The Registrar shall ensure the register is kept up to date and
shall make it available for inspection at the office of the Registrarduring normal working hours.
(8) A registered professional shall notify the Registrar of any
change in the name under which or the address at which he or shecarries on business.
34.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , a registered professional may
apply to the Registrar to have his or her name removed from theregister and, on receipt of the application and on payment of thespecified fee, the Registrar shall remove it.
(2) A person whose name has been removed from the register
may apply to the Registrar to have his or her name restored to theregister and, on application and payment of the specified fee, butsubject to any conditions imposed by the Admissions Board withrespect to such restoration, the Registrar shall restore it to theregister.
(3) Where a complaint is being investigated by the Professional
Conduct Committee under Part 6 in relation to a person, no
application shall be entertained by the Registrar to remove theperson’s name from the register until the investigation has beencompleted and the Committee has decided what action to take.
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent a Professional Conduct
Committee from refusing to restore a person’s name to the registeron the grounds of unfitness to practise quantity surveying orattaching conditions to such restoration.
(5) Where the Professional Conduct Committee decides to refuse
to so restore a person’s name or decides to attach conditions to suchrestoration, the Registrar shall forthwith send a notice to the personby prepaid registered post to the last address given in the registerinforming the person of the decision, the date on which it was madeand the reasons for it.
35.—(1) The registration body shall establish a Technical
Assessment Board to consider applications for registration in theregister from persons who do not fall within any of paragraphs (a)
to(k)ofsection 29(2) .
(2) The Technical Assessment Board shall consist of a
chairperson and 7 ordinary members, the latter appointed by theregistration body as follows:
(a) 3 quantity surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c), (e) and (f)of
section 29(2) ;
(b) 4 persons nominated for such appointment by the
Minister, being persons who are not quantity surveyors.
(3) The chairperson of the Technical Assessment Board shall be
a solicitor, a barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High
41Pt.4 S.33
Removal from
register ( Part 4 ).
Technical
Assessment Board(Part 4 ).Pt.4 S.35
Technical
Assessment Boardprocedure ( Part 4 ).
42[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
Court or Supreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by
the Minister.
36.—(1) Each of the following may apply to the Technical
Assessment Board for a decision that he or she is eligible to beregistered in the register pursuant to this section:
(a) a person who—
(i) on 1 January 2001 was a non-corporate member of
the Chartered Institute of Building, the Architectureand Surveying Institute (now merged with theChartered Institute of Building), the Association ofBuilding Engineers or the Institution of CivilEngineering Surveyors, and
(ii) has been performing duties commensurate with those
of a quantity surveyor for a period of 8 or more yearsin the State (but no period of such performance thatoccurs on or after the commencement of this sectionshall be reckoned for the purposes of thissubparagraph);
(b) a person who has been performing duties commensurate
with those of a quantity surveyor for a period of 10 ormore years in the State (but no period of suchperformance that occurs on or after the commencementof this section shall be reckoned for the purposes of thisparagraph).
(2) A person who makes an application under this section shall
submit the following to the Technical Assessment Board:
(a) a curriculum vitae providing details of the work carried
out by the applicant in the field of quantity surveyingduring the period referred to in paragraph (a)(ii) or, as
the case may be, paragraph (b) ofsubsection (1) ; and
(b) such independent verification, as the Technical
Assessment Board may require, of the documentationso submitted.
(3) The Technical Assessment Board may request additional
information to be submitted by the applicant within a specifiedperiod and may require the applicant to appear for an interview if itconsiders it necessary.
(4) Where an interview is required, at least 4 members of the
Technical Assessment Board shall be present for the interview.
(5) The interview shall be recorded in writing or in such other
form as the Technical Assessment Board may decide, and additionalinformation may, subsequent to the interview, be required to besubmitted by the applicant to those who conducted the interview.
(6) An applicant may be accompanied at the interview by a
professional advisor, including a lawyer, but any expense incurred bythe applicant in being so accompanied shall be borne by theapplicant.
(7) Where the Technical Assessment Board decides—[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(a) that the applicant is eligible for registration in the register
pursuant to this section, the chairperson shall advise theAdmissions Board which shall take the necessary stepsto register the applicant on payment of any applicableregistration fee, or
(b) that the applicant is not eligible for registration in the
register pursuant to this section, the chairperson shallimmediately send a notice in writing to the applicant, byprepaid registered post to the address of the applicant asfurnished in his or her application, advising the applicantof the decision, the date on which it was made and thereasons for it.
37.—(1) The registration body shall establish a Professional
Conduct Committee (the “Committee”).
(2) The Committee shall consist of a chairperson and 11 ordinary
members, the latter appointed by the registration body as follows:
(a) 5 quantity surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c), (e) and (f)of
section 29(2) ;
(b) 6 persons who are not quantity surveyors—
(i) 5 of whom are nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, and
(ii) one of whom is nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment.
(3) The chairperson of the Committee shall be a solicitor, a
barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment.
38.—(1) The registration body shall establish an Appeals Board.
(2) The Appeals Board shall consist of a chairperson and 5
ordinary members, the latter appointed by the registration body asfollows:
(a) 2 quantity surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c), (e) and (f)of
section 29(2) , neither of whom shall be a member of any
other Board or Committee established under this Part;
(b) 3 persons who are not quantity surveyors—
(i) 2 of whom are nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, and
(ii) one of whom is nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment,
43Pt.4 S.36
Professional
Conduct Committee(Part 4 ).
Appeals Board
(Part 4 ).Pt.4 S.38
Appeals procedure
(Part 4 ).
44[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
none of whom shall be a member of any other Board or
Committee established under this Part.
(3) The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall be a solicitor, a
barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister.
39.—(1) A person adversely affected by a decision of the
Admissions Board, the Technical Assessment Board or theProfessional Conduct Committee may appeal to the Appeals Boardagainst the decision.
(2) An appeal shall be in writing and lodged with the Appeals
Board within 3 months after the date of the decision beingappealed against.
(3) The appeal shall specify the decision to which the appeal
relates and the grounds on which the appeal rests.
(4) An appeal may be based on either procedural or substantive
matters.
(5) A person may, at any time before the appeal is heard,
withdraw the appeal in whole or in part by notifying the AppealsBoard in writing of the withdrawal.
(6) A witness at a hearing conducted by the Appeals Board has
the same immunities and privileges as if he or she were a witnessbefore the High Court.
(7) The chairperson of the Appeals Board may—
(a) direct in writing an appellant to attend before the Appeals
Board on a date and at a time and place specified in thedirection,
(b) direct in writing any other person whose evidence the
Appeals Board may require, to attend before theAppeals Board on a date and at a time and placespecified in the direction, and may direct the person tobring any document in the person’s possession relating tothe appeal,
(c) request the relevant Board or Committee whose decision
is being appealed against to produce any documents inits possession relating to the appeal, together with itsobservations on the appeal,
(d) give any other direction for the purpose of the proceedings
that appears to the chairperson to be fair and reasonable.
(8) The procedures of the Appeals Board shall make provision
for—
(a) notifying the appellant and the chairperson of the relevant
Board or Committee of the date, time and place of thesitting of the Appeals Board,
(b) advising the appellant of the appellant’s right—
(i) to be present at the Appeals Board’s sitting, and[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(ii) to present his or her case in person or, at his or her
own expense, through a legal representative,
(c) the examination of witnesses,
(d) determination by the Appeals Board as to whether or not
evidence should be given under oath,
(e) recording of proceedings.
(9) On the hearing of an appeal under this section, the Appeals
Board may—
(a) confirm the decision of the relevant Board or Committee,
subject to any amendment thereof the Appeals Boardthinks fit,
(b) annul the decision and direct the relevant Board or
Committee to make a new decision, or
(c) give such other directions as it thinks fit.
(10) The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall notify—
(a) the appellant in writing, sent by prepaid registered post to
the appellant’s stated address, of the decision taken onthe appeal, the date on which it was made and thereasons for it, and shall also advise the appellant of theright to appeal to the High Court against the AppealBoard’s decision,
(b) the relevant Board or Committee against whose decision
the appeal was made of the decision taken on the appeal,the date on which it was made and the reasons for it,
(c) where the appellant was the person who had lodged the
complaint with the Professional Conduct Committeeunder Part 6 , the registered quantity surveyor in respect
of whom the complaint was made, stating the decisiontaken on the appeal, the date on which it was made andthe reasons for it.
40.—(1) A person adversely affected by a decision of the Appeals
Board may, within 3 months after the date of such decision, appealto the High Court against the decision.
(2) On the hearing of an appeal under this section, the Court
may—
(a) confirm the decision of the Appeals Board, subject to any
amendment thereof the Court thinks fit,
(b) annul the decision and direct the Appeals Board to make
a new decision, or
(c) give such other directions as the Court thinks fit,
and the Court may direct how the costs of the appeal are to be borne.
(3) On the hearing of an appeal under this section from a decision
of the Appeals Board relating to a decision of the ProfessionalConduct Committee, the High Court may admit evidence of any
45Pt.4 S.39
Appeal to High
Court from decisionof Appeals Board(Part 4 ).Pt.4 S.40
Certain other
jurisdiction ofAppeals Board(Part 4 ).
Registration body
and AdmissionsBoard ( Part 5 ).
46[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
person of standing in the quantity surveying profession as to what
constitutes professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance.
41.—(1) If the Admissions Board fails to make a decision referred
to in subsection (12) ofsection 30 within—
(a) unless paragraph (b) applies, the period specified in that
subsection (12) ,o r
(b) if that period has been extended under subsection (13) of
that section, the period of that extension (or, if thatperiod has been extended more than once under thatsubsection, the last period of such extension),
the applicant referred to in section 30 may make a complaint to the
Appeals Board that such a failure has occurred.
(2) On the hearing of such a complaint and having given the
Admissions Board an opportunity to be heard, the Appeals Boardmay, as it thinks appropriate—
(a) give a direction to the Admissions Board to make the
decision concerned forthwith, or
(b) make itself a decision on the application concerned
referred to in section 30 (and where the Appeals Board
does so section 40 shall apply to such a decision as it
applies to any other decision of the Appeals Board).
PART 5
Registration of Building Surveyors
42.—(1) The Society of Chartered Surveyors shall be the
registration body for the purposes of this Part.
(2) For the purposes of the Directive, the registration body is the
competent authority in the State as respects building surveyors.
(3) The registration body shall establish an Admissions Board for
the purpose of registering persons under this Part.
(4) The Admissions Board shall consist of a chairperson and 7
ordinary members, the latter appointed by the registration body asfollows:
(a) 3 building surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c) and (e)of
section 43(2) ;
(b) 4 persons nominated for such appointment by the
Minister, being persons who are not building surveyors.
(5) The chairperson of the Admissions Board shall be a solicitor,
a barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
43.—(1) The registration body shall establish a register for
building surveyors (the “register”).
(2) Each of the following is eligible for registration in the register:
(a) a graduate of—
(i) the Dundalk Institute of Technology, or
(ii) such other educational body as may be prescribed,
who has received from it in any year prior to 2005 a
degree of Bachelor of Science in Building Surveying orin 2005 or any subsequent year an Honours degree ofBachelor of Science in Building Surveying or such otherdegree, diploma or qualification as may be prescribedand who, in each case, has at least 2 years appropriateexperience of performing duties commensurate withthose of a building surveryor;
(b) a fellow or associate of the Society of Chartered
Surveyors, Building Surveying Division, who has at least2 years practical experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of a building surveyor;
(c) a fellow or member of the Chartered Institute of Building,
Building Surveying Section, who has at least 2 yearspractical experience of performing duties commensuratewith those of a building surveyor;
(d) a former fellow or member of the Architecture and
Surveying Institute, Building Surveying Section (nowmerged with the Chartered Institute of Building), whohas at least 2 years practical experience of performingduties commensurate with those of a building surveyor;
(e) a fellow or member of the Association of Building
Engineers, Building Surveying Section, who has at least2 years practical experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of a building surveyor;
(f) a person who on or after 1 January 2001 and prior to 2005
attained a degree of Bachelor of Science in BuildingSurveying or in 2005 or any subsequent year an Honoursdegree of Bachelor of Science in Building Surveying andis enrolled as a fellow or associate of the Society ofChartered Surveyors, or as a fellow or member of theChartered Institute of Building, the Architecture andSurveying Institute or the Association of BuildingEngineers;
(g) a person eligible for such registration by virtue of section
44(which relates to holders of qualifications from other
states);
(h) a national of a Member State who has been awarded in a
Member State a qualification that the State, pursuant toa relevant measure, is obliged to recognise ascorresponding to a qualification referred to inparagraph (a) ;
(i) a national or resident of a state who, by virtue of the
following agreement, is entitled to have his or her
47Pt.5
Registration of
building surveyors.Pt.5 S.43
Nationals from
other states eligiblefor registration(Part 5 ).
48[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
qualifications in the field of building surveying recognised
in the State, namely, an agreement that—
(i) is entered into between the European Union and the
World Trade Organisation, and
(ii) provides for the recognition by the states to which the
agreement relates of qualifications of a classspecified in the agreement;
(j) a person (not being a person who is eligible for registration
pursuant to section 44 ) who—
(i) has been awarded in a state, other than a Member
State or a state which is a member of the WorldTrade Organisation, a degree, diploma or otherqualification in building surveying, and
(ii) can demonstrate that he or she has sufficient post-
graduate experience of performing dutiescommensurate with those of a building surveyor;
(k) a person who has been assessed as eligible for registration
by the Technical Assessment Board in accordance withthe practical experience assessment procedures.
(3) Membership of the registration body is not a prerequisite for
registration in the register or continuance of registration and thesame fee shall be charged for registration in the register whether ornot the particular person is a member of the registration body.
(4) No prescribing in respect of an educational body or in respect
of any degree, diploma or other qualification that is awarded orconferred by it shall be done for the purposes of subsection (2)(a)
unless the Minister is satisfied that the course provided by the bodyleading to the award or conferral of the degree, diploma or otherqualification provides the requisite instruction in the variouselements of the discipline of building surveying.
(5) For the purposes of the Minister satisfying himself or herself
of the foregoing matter, the Minister shall consult with the NationalQualifications Authority of Ireland or the Higher Education andTraining Awards Council as appropriate.
44.—(1) A person who wishes to be registered by virtue of
satisfying conditions for recognition of his or her qualifications underChapter I of Title III of the Directive may apply to the AdmissionsBoard for a decision that he or she is eligible to be registered inpursuance of this section.
(2) A person who makes an application under this section shall
submit the following to the Admissions Board:
(a) an attestation of competence issued by another Member
State in relation to that person;
(b) evidence of formal qualifications;
(c) where appropriate, evidence that the person has, on a full
time basis, performed duties commensurate with those ofa building surveyor for not less than 2 years during theprevious 10 years.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Directive, the Admissions
Board may request additional information to be submitted by theapplicant within a specified period and may require the applicant toappear for an interview if it considers it necessary.
(4) Where an interview is required, at least 4 members of the
Admissions Board shall be present for the interview.
(5) The interview shall be recorded in writing or in such other
form as the Admissions Board may decide, and additionalinformation may, subsequent to the interview, be required to besubmitted by the applicant to those who conducted the interview.
(6) An applicant may be accompanied at the interview by a
professional advisor, including a lawyer, but any expense incurred bythe applicant in being so accompanied shall be borne by theapplicant.
(7) In relation to an application under this section, the
Admissions Board may seek independent verification of documentsfurnished to it in accordance with Article 50 of the Directive.
(8) ( a) The Admissions Board may require, in accordance with
Article 14 of the Directive, that a person who makes anapplication under this section shall complete anadaptation period of up to 3 years or take an aptitudetest.
(b) For that purpose, the Admissions Board shall serve a
notice on the applicant stating that—
(i) the applicant may opt to complete an adaptation
period or take an aptitude test (and thosealternatives are referred to in subparagraph (iii) as
the “2 alternatives”),
(ii) if it is an adaptation period the applicant opts to
complete, that period shall be of a duration specifiedin the notice,
(iii) if the applicant fails to opt as between the 2
alternatives (and notify, in writing, his or herdecision in that regard to the Board within a periodspecified for that purpose in the notice), the Boardshall determine whether to require the applicant tocomplete an adaptation period or take an aptitudetest (and, if it is an adaptation period the Boarddetermines that it shall require the applicant tocomplete, the duration of that period shall be thesame as the duration stated in the notice for thepurposes of subparagraph (ii) ), and
(iv) if the applicant fails, having been registered pursuant
to this section, to complete successfully anadaptation period or take and pass an aptitude testwhich, by virtue of the Directive and this section—
(I) he or she has opted to complete or take and
pass, or
(II) the Admissions Board requires him or her to
complete or take and pass,
49Pt.5 S.44Pt.5 S.44
50[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
the applicant’s name shall be erased from the
register.
(9) The Admissions Board shall satisfy itself that the person has
a knowledge of language necessary for practising building surveyingin the State.
(10) Where the Admissions Board decides—
(a) that the applicant is eligible for registration in the register
pursuant to this section, it shall take the necessary stepsto register the applicant on payment of any applicableregistration fee, or
(b) that—
(i) the applicant is not eligible for registration in the
register pursuant to this section, or
(ii) without prejudice to subsection (8) , the applicant
should obtain a knowledge of language necessary forpractising building surveying in the State,
the chairperson shall immediately send a notice in writing
to the applicant, by prepaid registered post to the addressof the applicant as furnished in his or her application,advising the applicant of the decision, the date on whichit was made and the reasons for it.
(11) A person who is registered pursuant to this section shall—
(a) use the professional title — “building surveyor”, and
(b) unless he or she is a member of a body referred to in
Annex 1 of the Directive, not expressly represent orimply, by use of any words or letters, that he or she is amember of that body.
(12) The Admissions Board shall make a decision on whether or
not a person is eligible for registration in the register pursuant to thissection as quickly as possible and, in any event (but subject tosubsection (13) ), within 3 months after the date of submission of the
completed documentation by the applicant to the Board.
(13) If in the particular circumstances of the matter the
Admissions Board determines that it is not practicable for it to makethe decision referred to in subsection (12) within the period referred
to in that subsection it may, by notice in writing sent, by prepaidregistered post, to the applicant, extend that period once or morethan once (but the period or the aggregate of the periods of suchextension shall not be more than one month).
(14) ( a) If it appears to the Admissions Board that a person who
is registered in the register pursuant to this section—
(i) has, in a case where subsection (8) applies, failed to
complete successfully an adaptation period or takeand pass an aptitude test, as the case may be,mentioned in that subsection, or
(ii) has, in a case where subsection (10)(b)(ii) applies,
failed to obtain the knowledge of languagementioned in that provision,[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
the Admissions Board shall decide that the name of the
person shall be erased from the register.
(b) If the Admissions Board makes such a decision, it shall
direct the Registrar to erase the name of the person fromthe register; on erasing the name of the person from theregister, the Registrar shall forthwith send by prepaidregistered post to such person, at the person’s address asstated in the register, notice in writing of the erasure.
(15) So much of the provisions of this section as have effect in
cases where—
(a) the person concerned is a national of a Member State,
(b) any act or thing is done or awarded or issued in, or by a
competent authority of a Member State, or
(c) a matter is provided under the law of a Member State,
shall, to the extent that the terms of these provisions would prevent
the equal treatment or recognition mentioned in subsection (16)
being accorded to the person mentioned in that subsection, be readsubject to such modifications as will allow that equal treatment orrecognition to be accorded to that person.
(16) ( a) The equal treatment mentioned in subsection (15) is the
equal treatment of a family member (within the meaningof Directive 2004/38 of the European Parliament and ofthe Council of 29 April 2004) of a national of a MemberState required by Article 42(1) of that Directive.
(b) The recognition mentioned in subsection (15) is the
recognition required by Article 27 of Council Directive2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 of qualifications of a personwho is a beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protectionstatus (within the meaning of that Directive).
45.—(1) A person applying for registration under this Part shall,
at the time of applying, pay the specified fee to the registration bodyand, in addition, as a condition of continuing to be registered, pay aspecified annual fee on a date as may be specified by theregistration body.
(2) Where the Registrar has twice sent a notice by prepaid
registered post to a registered professional’s address as given in theregister, requesting payment of the annual fee the Registrar may, ifthe person has not paid the fee within 2 months after sending thesecond notice, remove the person’s name from the register andthereupon shall send a notice by prepaid registered post informingthe person that he or she is no longer registered.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) , the Registrar may, in cases of
verified hardship, waive the requirement to pay a fee under thissection, direct that a fee of an amount lesser than the specifiedamount may be paid for the purposes of this section or remit a feepaid under this section, in whole or in part.
(4) Where a person’s name has been removed from the register
for non-payment of fees and the person pays the outstanding feestogether with any other specified fees, the Registrar shall re-enter
51Pt.5 S.44
Fees ( Part 5 ).Pt.5 S.45
Prohibition against
using term“building surveyor”unless registered.
52[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
the person’s name in the register and it shall be treated as having
been re-entered on the date it was removed.
46.—(1) A person who—
(a) not being registered under this Part, uses the title
“building surveyor”, either alone or in combination withany other words or letters, or name, title or description,implying that the person is so registered,
(b) with intent to deceive, makes use of a certificate issued
under this Part to such person or any other person,
(c) makes or causes to be made, any false declaration or
misrepresentation for the purpose of obtainingregistration under this Part, or aids or abets such action,or
(d) practises or carries on business under any name, style or
title containing the words “building surveyor”, unless heor she is registered under this Part,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary
conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 12 months or both.
(2) If the contravention in respect of which a person is convicted
of an offence under subsection (1) is continued after the conviction,
the person shall be guilty of a further offence on every day on whichthe contravention continues and for each such offence the personshall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \500.
(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent a body corporate, firm or
partnership from carrying on business under a name, style or titlecontaining the words “building surveyor” if—
(a) the business, so far as it relates to building surveying, is
under the control and management of a registeredprofessional, and
(b) in all premises where its business relating to building
surveying is carried on, it is by or under the supervisionof a registered professional.
(4) Paragraph (a) or(d)ofsubsection (1) shall not apply to a
person who has—
(a) applied for registration under this Part and in respect of
whom the Admissions Board or the TechnicalAssessment Board, as the case may be, has not made adecision on that application (and the person has notwithdrawn that application to the board concerned),
(b) appealed to the Appeals Board against a decision of the
Admissions Board or the Technical Assessment Boardon an application referred to in paragraph (a) and in
respect of whom the Appeals Board has not made adecision on that appeal (and the person has notwithdrawn that appeal to the Appeals Board), or
(c) appealed to the High Court against a decision of the
Appeals Board referred to in paragraph (b) and in[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
respect of whom the High Court has not made a decision
on that appeal (and the person has not withdrawn thatappeal to the High Court).
(5) The registration body may by rules provide that subsection (3)
shall not apply in relation to a body corporate, firm or partnershipunless it has provided to the registration body such information,necessary for determining whether that subsection applies, as maybe provided for in such rules.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person is not to be regarded
as not practising by reason only of that person being in theemployment of another person.
(7) In this section, “business” includes any undertaking which is
carried on for fee or reward or in the course of which services areprovided otherwise than free of charge.
47.—(1) The registration body shall appoint a Registrar to be
responsible for keeping the register under this Part.
(2) The registration body, in addition to paying the Registrar a
salary or fee, may pay a pension to the Registrar or makecontributions to the payment of a pension, and may pay the Registrarallowances and expenses.
(3) The register shall be in such form, including electronic,
photographic or other form, as the registration body decides.
(4) Where a person has applied for registration in accordance with
this Part, if the Admissions Board is satisfied that the person isentitled to be registered, the Registrar shall enter the person’s namein the register.
(5) Where a person’s name is entered in the register, the Registrar
shall send to the person a certificate stating that the person isregistered.
(6) Where a person receives a certificate under subsection (5) , the
person shall forthwith cause the certificate to be displayed at theplace where the person practises building surveying at all timesduring which his or her registration continues, but not otherwise.
(7) The Registrar shall ensure the register is kept up to date and
shall make it available for inspection at the office of the Registrarduring normal working hours.
(8) A registered professional shall notify the Registrar of any
change in the name under which or the address at which he or shecarries on business.
48.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) , a registered professional may
apply to the Registrar to have his or her name removed from theregister and, on receipt of the application and on payment of thespecified fee, the Registrar shall remove it.
(2) A person whose name has been removed from the register
may apply to the Registrar to have his or her name restored to theregister and, on application and payment of the specified fee, butsubject to any conditions imposed by the Admissions Board with
53Pt.5 S.46
Registrar ( Part 5 ).
Removal from
register ( Part 5 ).Pt.5 S.48
Technical
Assessment Board(Part 5 ).
Technical
Assessment Boardprocedure ( Part 5 ).
54[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
respect to such restoration, the Registrar shall restore it to the
register.
(3) Where a complaint is being investigated by the Professional
Conduct Committee under Part 6 in relation to a person, no
application shall be entertained by the Registrar to remove theperson’s name from the register until the investigation has beencompleted and the Committee has decided what action to take.
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent a Professional Conduct
Committee from refusing to restore a person’s name to the registeron the grounds of unfitness to practise building surveying orattaching conditions to such restoration.
(5) Where the Professional Conduct Committee decides to refuse
to so restore a person’s name or decides to attach conditions to suchrestoration, the Registrar shall forthwith send a notice to the personby prepaid registered post to the last address given in the registerinforming the person of the decision, the date on which it was madeand the reasons for it.
49.—(1) The registration body shall establish a Technical
Assessment Board to consider applications for registration in theregister from persons who do not fall within any of paragraphs (a)
to(j)ofsection 43(2) .
(2) The Technical Assessment Board shall consist of a
chairperson and 7 ordinary members, the latter appointed by theregistration body as follows:
(a) 3 building surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c) and (e)of
section 43(2) ;
(b) 4 persons nominated for such appointment by the
Minister, being persons who are not building surveyors.
(3) The chairperson of the Technical Assessment Board shall be
a solicitor, a barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, HighCourt or Supreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson bythe Minister.
50.—(1) Each of the following may apply to the Technical
Assessment Board for a decision that he or she is eligible to beregistered in the register pursuant to this section:
(a) a person who—
(i) on 1 May 1999 was a non-corporate member of the
Chartered Institute of Building, the Architecture andSurveying Institute (now merged with the CharteredInstitute of Building) or the Association of BuildingEngineers, and
(ii) has been performing duties commensurate with those
of a building surveyor for a period of 8 or more yearsin the State (but no period of such performance thatoccurs on or after the commencement of this sectionshall be reckoned for the purposes of thissubparagraph);[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(b) a person who has been performing duties commensurate
with those of a building surveyor for a period of 10 ormore years in the State (but no period of suchperformance that occurs on or after the commencementof this section shall be reckoned for the purposes of thisparagraph).
(2) A person who makes an application under this section shall
submit the following to the Technical Assessment Board:
(a) a curriculum vitae providing details of the work carried
out by the applicant in the field of building surveyingduring the period referred to in paragraph (a)(ii) or, as
the case may be, paragraph (b) ofsubsection (1) ; and
(b) such independent verification, as the Technical
Assessment Board may require, of the documentationso submitted.
(3) The Technical Assessment Board may request additional
information to be submitted by the applicant within a specifiedperiod and may require the applicant to appear for an interview if itconsiders it necessary.
(4) Where an interview is required, at least 4 members of the
Technical Assessment Board shall be present for the interview.
(5) The interview shall be recorded in writing or in such other
form as the Technical Assessment Board may decide, and additionalinformation may, subsequent to the interview, be required to besubmitted by the applicant to those who conducted the interview.
(6) An applicant may be accompanied at the interview by a
professional advisor, including a lawyer, but any expense incurred bythe applicant in being so accompanied shall be borne by theapplicant.
(7) Where the Technical Assessment Board decides—
(a) that the applicant is eligible for registration in the register
pursuant to this section, the chairperson shall advise theAdmissions Board which shall take the necessary stepsto register the applicant on payment of any applicableregistration fee, or
(b) that the applicant is not eligible for registration in the
register pursuant to this section, the chairperson shallimmediately send a notice in writing to the applicant, byprepaid registered post to the address of the applicant asfurnished in his or her application, advising the applicantof the decision, the date on which it was made and thereasons for it.
51.—(1) The registration body shall establish a Professional
Conduct Committee (the “Committee”).
(2) The Committee shall consist of a chairperson and 11 ordinary
members, the latter appointed by the registration body as follows:
(a) 5 building surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with the
55Pt.5 S.50
Professional
Conduct Committee(Part 5 ).Pt.5 S.51
Appeals Board
(Part 5 ).
Appeals procedure
(Part 5 ).
56[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
bodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c) and (e)of
section 43(2) ;
(b) 6 persons who are not building surveyors—
(i) 5 of whom are nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, and
(ii) one of whom is nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment.
(3) The chairperson of the Committee shall be a solicitor, a
barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment.
52.—(1) The registration body shall establish an Appeals Board.
(2) The Appeals Board shall consist of a chairperson and 5
ordinary members, the latter appointed by the registration body asfollows:
(a) 2 building surveyors nominated for such appointment by
the registration body following consultation with thebodies referred to in paragraphs (b), (c) and(e)ofsection
43(2) , neither of whom shall be a member of any other
Board or Committee established under this Part;
(b) 3 persons who are not building surveyors—
(i) 2 of whom are nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, and
(ii) one of whom is nominated for such appointment by
the Minister, with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment,
none of whom shall be a member of any other Board or
Committee established under this Part.
(3) The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall be a solicitor, a
barrister or a former judge of the Circuit Court, High Court orSupreme Court who shall be appointed as chairperson by theMinister.
53.—(1) A person adversely affected by a decision of the
Admissions Board, the Technical Assessment Board or theProfessional Conduct Committee may appeal to the Appeals Boardagainst the decision.
(2) An appeal shall be in writing and lodged with the Appeals
Board within 3 months after the date of the decision beingappealed against.
(3) The appeal shall specify the decision to which the appeal
relates and the grounds on which the appeal rests.
(4) An appeal may be based on either procedural or substantive
matters.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(5) A person may, at any time before the appeal is heard,
withdraw the appeal in whole or in part by notifying the AppealsBoard in writing of the withdrawal.
(6) A witness at a hearing conducted by the Appeals Board has
the same immunities and privileges as if he or she were a witnessbefore the High Court.
(7) The chairperson of the Appeals Board may—
(a) direct in writing an appellant to attend before the Appeals
Board on a date and at a time and place specified in thedirection,
(b) direct in writing any other person whose evidence the
Appeals Board may require, to attend before theAppeals Board on a date and at a time and placespecified in the direction, and may direct the person tobring any document in the person’s possession relating tothe appeal,
(c) request the relevant Board or Committee whose decision
is being appealed against to produce any documents inits possession relating to the appeal, together with itsobservations on the appeal,
(d) give any other direction for the purpose of the proceedings
that appears to the chairperson to be fair and reasonable.
(8) The procedures of the Appeals Board shall make provision
for—
(a) notifying the appellant and the chairperson of the relevant
Board or Committee of the date, time and place of thesitting of the Appeals Board,
(b) advising the appellant of the appellant’s right—
(i) to be present at the Appeals Board’s sitting, and
(ii) to present his or her case in person or, at his or her
own expense, through a legal representative,
(c) the examination of witnesses,
(d) determination by the Appeals Board as to whether or not
evidence should be given under oath,
(e) recording of proceedings.
(9) On the hearing of an appeal under this section, the Appeals
Board may—
(a) confirm the decision of the relevant Board or Committee,
subject to any amendment thereof the Appeals Boardthinks fit,
(b) annul the decision and direct the relevant Board or
Committee to make a new decision, or
(c) give such other directions as it thinks fit.
(10) The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall notify—
57Pt.5 S.53Pt.5 S.53
Appeal to High
Court from decisionof Appeals Board(Part 5 ).
Certain other
jurisdiction ofAppeals Board(Part 5 ).
58[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(a) the appellant in writing, sent by prepaid registered post to
the appellant’s stated address, of the decision taken onthe appeal, the date on which it was made and thereasons for it, and shall also advise the appellant of theright to appeal to the High Court against the AppealsBoard’s decision,
(b) the relevant Board or Committee against whose decision
the appeal was made of the decision taken on the appeal,the date on which it was made and the reasons for it,
(c) where the appellant was the person who had lodged the
complaint with the Professional Conduct Committeeunder Part 6 , the registered building surveyor in respect
of whom the complaint was made, stating the decisiontaken on the appeal, the date on which it was made andthe reasons for it.
54.—(1) A person adversely affected by a decision of the Appeals
Board may, within 3 months after the date of such decision, appealto the High Court against the decision.
(2) On the hearing of an appeal under this section, the Court
may—
(a) confirm the decision of the Appeals Board, subject to any
amendment thereof the Court thinks fit,
(b) annul the decision and direct the Appeals Board to make
a new decision, or
(c) give such other directions as the Court thinks fit,
and the Court may direct how the costs of the appeal are to be borne.
(3) On the hearing of an appeal under this section from a decision
of the Appeals Board relating to a decision of the ProfessionalConduct Committee, the High Court may admit evidence of anyperson of standing in the building surveying profession as to whatconstitutes professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance.
55.—(1) If the Admissions Board fails to make a decision referred
to in subsection (12) ofsection 44 within—
(a) unless paragraph (b) applies, the period specified in that
subsection (12) ,o r
(b) if that period has been extended under subsection (13) of
that section, the period of that extension (or, if thatperiod has been extended more than once under thatsubsection, the last period of such extension),
the applicant referred to in section 44 may make a complaint to the
Appeals Board that such a failure has occurred.
(2) On the hearing of such a complaint and having given the
Admissions Board an opportunity to be heard, the Appeals Boardmay, as it thinks appropriate—[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(a) give a direction to the Admissions Board to make the
decision concerned forthwith, or
(b) make itself a decision on the application concerned
referred to in section 44 (and where the Appeals Board
does so section 54 shall apply to such a decision as it
applies to any other decision of the Appeals Board).
PART 6
Fitness to Practise
56.—(1) The registration body shall prepare a code (in this Part
referred to as the “code”) specifying the standards of professionalconduct and practice that shall be adhered to by registeredprofessionals.
(2) The registration body shall review the code prepared by it
from time to time and may amend its provisions if it thinks fit.
(3) A draft of the proposed code or any amendment of it shall
be—
(a) published by the registration body, in such manner as it
may determine, together with an invitation to the publicand any organisation or other body which appears to theregistration body to have an interest in the matter tocomment on the draft before a date specified by theregistration body in the invitation,
(b) submitted by the registration body to the Competition
Authority with a request for the furnishing in writing(before a date specified by the registration body in thesubmission) by the Authority of its opinion as to whetherany provision of the draft would be likely to result incompetition being prevented, restricted or distorted.
(4) The registration body shall take into account any comment
received by it in accordance with an invitation under subsection
(3)(a) and any opinion in writing of the Competition Authority
received by it in accordance with a request under subsection (3)(b)
in relation to the draft code or any amendment of it before itprepares the code or the amendment.
(5) The registration body shall provide a copy of the code it has
prepared to anyone who requests it, on payment of a reasonablecharge, or without charge where it considers it appropriate.
57.—(1) Any person may complain to the Professional Conduct
Committee (the “Committee”) concerning an action of a registeredprofessional which is alleged to amount to professional misconductor poor professional performance.
(2) Where the Committee is of the opinion that a prima facie case
has not been established for an inquiry under subsection (5) with
respect to the complaint, it shall so inform the complainant in writingand shall not proceed further.
(3) The Committee may, where it considers it appropriate to do
so, request the complainant and the registered professional who is
59Pt.5 S.55
Establishment of
ProfessionalConduct Standards.
Complaints to
ProfessionalConductCommittee.Pt.6 S.57
60[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
the subject of the complaint to seek resolution of the complaint by
mediation before a person or persons appointed under rules madeby the relevant registration body and if the complainant and theregistered professional consent to such mediation being conducted,such mediation shall be conducted accordingly.
(4) If the mediation does not result in the resolution of the
complaint, the Committee shall proceed to consider the complaint.
(5) The Committee may decide to hold an inquiry with respect to
a complaint and where it does so the chairperson of the Committeeshall notify the other members of the Committee and thecomplainant and the registered professional of the date, time andplace for the hearing, and the notice under this subsection to theregistered professional shall be sent by prepaid registered post to theaddress given in the register, shall contain details of the nature ofthe alleged complaint against the registered professional and shallinform the registered professional of his or her right to appear beforethe Committee and to be represented at the hearing by a person ofhis or her choice.
(6) For an inquiry under this section, the Committee has the
powers, rights and privileges vested in the High Court or a judgethereof in hearing an action, for the purpose of—
(a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them
on oath or otherwise, and
(b) compelling the production of documents,
and, for such purposes, a summons signed by the chairperson of the
Committee is equivalent to any formal procedure capable of beinginstituted in an action.
(7) Where a person summoned by the chairperson to attend
before a hearing of the Committee or to produce a document—
(a) makes default in attending,
(b) fails or refuses to produce a document that is within that
person’s power to produce, or
(c) refuses to take an oath or refuses to answer a question
which the Committee may lawfully ask,
that person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on
summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months or both.
(8) If the contravention in respect of which a person is convicted
of an offence under subsection (7) is continued after the conviction,
the person shall be guilty of a further offence on every day on whichthe contravention continues and for each such offence the personshall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \500.
(9) A witness at a hearing under this section has the same
immunities and privileges as if he or she were a witness before theHigh Court.
(10) On completion of an inquiry, the Committee shall produce a
report embodying its findings, including the nature of the complaint,the evidence before it, such other matters relating to the registeredprofessional as it thinks fit and its opinion respecting whether a case[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
of professional misconduct or poor professional performance was
established or not.
(11) The findings of the Committee on any matter referred to it
shall not be made public, without the consent of the person who hasbeen the subject of the inquiry, unless the Committee has found theperson to be guilty of professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance.
(12) Where the Committee has not found the registered
professional guilty of professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance it shall so notify the complainant and inform thecomplainant of his or her right of appeal to the Appeals Boardagainst its finding.
58.—(1) Where the Professional Conduct Committee
(the “Committee”) finds there has been no professional misconductor poor professional performance on the part of the registeredprofessional, it shall take no further action in the matter and shall soinform the registered professional.
(2) Where the Committee determines that a registered
professional is guilty of professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance, it may, subject to the other provisions of this Act, doone or more of the following:
(a) advise, admonish or censure the registered professional in
relation to the conduct or performance complained of;
(b) impose on the registered professional a fine of a specified
amount and failing payment by him or her of the fine tothe registration body within 2 months of his or her beingnotified of its imposition, the Registrar may erase theperson’s name from the register;
(c) direct that during a specified period, registration of the
person’s name in the register shall not have effect;
(d) erase the person’s name from the register;
(e) direct that the person’s name remain on the register but
impose such conditions for the name remaining on theregister as it considers appropriate, to be complied withby the registered professional,
and the chairperson of the Committee shall forthwith notify the
person by prepaid registered post sent to the person’s address asgiven in the register, of the Committee’s decision, the date thereofand the reasons therefor and of the person’s right of appeal to theAppeals Board against the decision.
(3) Without prejudice to the operation of the other provisions of
this Act in relation to appeals against decisions to exercise suchpowers, none of the powers under subsection (2)(b) to(e)may be
exercised by the Committee unless the decision to exercise the powerhas been confirmed by the High Court under subsection (6) or, as
the case may be, on an appeal to that Court under section 26 ,40or
54as appropriate, and then may only be exercised subject to the
terms (if any) of such confirmation.
(4) Where a registered professional appeals against a decision of
the Committee to the Appeals Board within the period provided for
61Pt.6 S.57
Decision of the
ProfessionalConductCommittee.Pt.6 S.58
Proceedings
privileged.
62[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
under this Act, the decision of the Committee is stayed until the
appeal is disposed of, including any period provided for a furtherappeal to the High Court.
(5) Subsection (6) applies if—
(a) no appeal under this Act is taken against the decision of
the Committee mentioned in that subsection, or
(b) (i) such an appeal taken against the decision has been
disposed of and the decision has been confirmed(with or without amendment of it), and
(ii) that confirmation is not a confirmation of the High
Court under section 26 ,40or54, as appropriate.
(6) The Registrar may apply to the High Court for confirmation
of a decision of the Committee to exercise the powers undersubsection (2)(b) ,(c),(d)or(e)and, if the Registrar so applies, the
High Court, on the hearing of the application, shall, unless it seesgood reason to the contrary, declare accordingly and, where thedeclaration relates to a decision to exercise the powers undersubsection (2)(d) , either (as the Court may consider proper) direct
the Registrar to erase the name of such person from the registerconcerned or direct that during a specified period (beginning notearlier than 7 days after the decision of the Court) registration of theperson’s name in that register shall not have effect.
(7) On erasing the name of a person from any register under this
section, the Registrar shall forthwith send by prepaid registered postto such person, at the person’s address as stated in the register, noticein writing of the erasure.
(8) Where a direction is given under this section that during a
specified period registration of the name of a person in any registershall not have effect, the Registrar shall, before the commencementof that period, send by prepaid registered post to such person, atthe person’s address as stated in the register, notice in writing ofsuch direction.
(9) The name of any person that has been erased under this
section may be restored to the register concerned on the direction ofthe Committee, but not otherwise, and the Committee may attachsuch conditions as it sees fit to the restoration (including payment ofa fee not exceeding the fee provided for an application forregistration in the first instance).
(10) Where the registration of a person in a register has ceased to
have effect under this section for a period of specified duration, theCommittee may, if it thinks fit, on application made to it by suchperson, by direction terminate the suspension and the Committeemay attach such conditions as it sees fit to the termination (includingpayment of a fee not exceeding the fee provided for an applicationfor registration in the first instance).
59.—Proceedings of or communications to or by a Professional
Conduct Committee in the course of an inquiry, and reports of theCommittee made in the exercise or performance of its powers, dutiesor functions, under this Part shall, in any action for defamation, beabsolutely privileged.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
PART 7
Miscellaneous Provisions
60.—(1) If a person intends to provide, in reliance on Article 5(2)
of the Directive, architectural, quantity surveying or buildingsurveying services in the State on a temporary and occasional basis,the person shall notify the Admissions Board of that intention andthe Admissions Board shall, subject to subsection (5) , on receipt of
that notification, register the person in the register under Part 3, 4
or5, as the case may be, for that purpose.
(2) A person who notifies the Admissions Board pursuant to
subsection (1) shall, if the occasion of the notification is the first
occasion on which he or she intends, on foot of such a notification,to provide architectural, quantity surveying or building surveyingservices, as the case may be, in the State, submit the following to theAdmissions Board:
(a) a declaration of his or her intention to provide the services
in accordance with Article 7 of the Directive, whichdeclaration shall include details of insurance or othermeans of personal or collective protection with regard toprofessional liability;
(b) proof of his or her nationality;
(c) an attestation of the competent authority of the Member
State where he or she is established that he or she islegally established in that state for the purposes ofproviding the activities concerned and is not prohibitedfrom practising architecture, quantity surveying orbuilding surveying, as the case may be, temporarily orotherwise, at the time of delivery of the attestation;
(d) evidence of the relevant professional qualifications; and
(e) if required by the Directive as respects an applicant who
has moved from the Member State of establishment,evidence that he or she has performed functionscommensurate with those of an architect, quantitysurveyor or building surveyor as appropriate, in thatMember State, for at least 2 of the 10 years precedingthe application.
(3) If the occasion of the notification under subsection (1) is not
the first occasion on which the person concerned has intended, onfoot of such a notification, to provide the relevant services in theState, the Admissions Board may, if there has been a material changein the situation substantiated by any of the documentation referredto in paragraphs (b) to(d)ofsubsection (2) , require the person to
submit to it fresh documentation of the kind referred to in theparagraph or paragraphs concerned.
(4) If a period of more than 12 months has elapsed since the
registration, pursuant to this section, of a person in the register underPart 3 ,4or5(and the period for which the person is so registered
has not expired), the Admissions Board may, unless the person doesnot intend to provide the relevant services in the State in the ensuingperiod of 12 months, require the person to make a fresh declarationof his or her intention to provide the relevant services in accordancewith Article 7 of the Directive; if the person does not make such a
63Temporary
registration underTitle II of Directive.Pt.7 S.60
Registration body
may seek assistanceand make rules.
64[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
declaration, the Admissions Board may remove the person’s name
from the relevant register.
(5) ( a) If a person who notifies the Admissions Board pursuant
tosubsection (1) fails to comply with subsection (2) ,o ra s
the case may be, with a requirement under subsection (3)
then, subject to paragraph (b) , the Admissions Board
shall decide not to register the person in the register.
(b) The Admissions Board may, at its discretion, afford the
person the opportunity to remedy the failure referred toinparagraph (a) , and if the person does so within a
reasonable time after being afforded that opportunity,the Admissions Board shall register the person in theregister.
(6) Where the applicant is registered in the register under Part 3
for a temporary period pursuant to this section, he or she shall usethe title of architect while providing architectural services in theState until his or her registration ceases.
(7) Where the applicant is registered in the register under Part 4
or5for a temporary period pursuant to this section and is providing
quantity surveying or building surveying services in the State, he orshe shall—
(a) if a professional title exists for the activity or quantity
surveyor or building surveyor, as the case may be, in theMember State where he or she is legally established, usethat title, which shall be indicated in the official languageor one of the official languages of that Member State, or
(b) if no such professional title exists in the Member State
where he or she is legally established, indicate his or herformal qualification in the official language or one of theofficial languages of that Member State,
in a way that avoids confusion with the title of quantity surveyor or
building surveyor.
(8) The Admissions Board may, in pursuance of Article 9 of the
Directive, require a person who is registered in the register under
Part 3, 4 or5for a temporary period pursuant to this section to
furnish to a person to whom he or she provides architectural,quantity surveying or building surveying services, as the case may be,in the State all or any of the information specified in that Article.
61.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , a registration body may arrange
with any person to assist it, or any other board or committeeestablished under this Act, in the proper discharge of its or theirfunctions.
(2) A registration body shall not make an arrangement referred
to in subsection (1) as respects the discharge of the functions under
section 20, 34, 48 or67orPart 6 .
(3) Subject to subsection (4) , a registration body may make rules
for facilitating and carrying out its functions and the functions of theother boards and committees, including the Appeals Board, providedfor under this Act.[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(4) Before making rules, the registration body shall publish a draft
of the rules and circulate them to the board or committee affectedfor its comments.
62.—(1) A registration body may specify that a fee of a specified
amount shall be payable to it in respect of the doing of any of thefollowing, namely:
(a) processing applications for registration;
(b) the annual retention of a person’s name in the register;
(c) restoring a person’s name in the register after it has been
erased pursuant to a provision of this Act;
(d) removing a person’s name from the register on the
application of that person;
(e) entering additional qualifications, not being qualifications
required for the purpose of registration, of a person inthe register;
(f) issuing a certificate of registration;
(g) providing any other service which the registration body
may provide.
(2) A registration body may determine that in respect of the doing
of any of the things referred to in subsection (1)(a) to(g)a fee of
a different amount shall be payable by reference to the differentcircumstances in which it is done.
(3) A fee shall not be specified in accordance with subsection (1)
without the approval of the Minister.
(4) The amount of a fee specified in accordance with subsection
(1)shall not in any case exceed the total of—
(a) the costs in providing the services in respect of which the
fee is paid, and
(b) the reasonable costs incurred by the registration body in
collecting, accounting for and administering the fee.
63.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) and payment of the specified
fee, a person who is registered under Part 3 ,4or5may apply to the
registration body, in the form and manner it determines, to have anadditional qualification noted in the register.
(2) The registration body shall determine what additional
qualifications other than those required for registration may benoted in the register.
64.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for prescribing any
matter referred to in this Act as prescribed or to be prescribed, orin relation to any matter referred to in this Act as the subject ofregulations.
65Pt.7 S.61
Registration body
may specify fees.
Additional
qualifications.
Regulations.Pt.7 S.64
Correction of
register.
Expenses of
registration bodies,boards andcommittees, etc.
Prosecution of
offences under thisAct.
66[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(2) Regulations under this Act may contain such incidental,
supplemental and consequential provisions as appear to the Ministerto be necessary or expedient.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and, if aresolution annulling the regulation is passed by either such Housewithin the next 21 days on which that House has sat after theregulation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulledaccordingly but without prejudice to the validity of any previouslydone thereunder.
65.—(1) For the purpose of keeping a register provided for under
this Act, the Registrar thereof shall correct all verbal and clericalerrors in such register, remove therefrom all entries procured byfraud or misrepresentation, enter in the register every change whichcomes to the Registrar’s knowledge in the addresses of registeredprofessionals, and remove therefrom the names of all persons whosedeath has either been notified to, or comes to the knowledge of, theAdmissions Board.
(2) Where the Registrar takes any action under subsection (1) , the
Registrar shall forthwith notify the person concerned or next of kin,as the case may be, if such person can be identified, of the actiontaken and the reasons therefor.
66.—(1) Expenditure incurred by a registration body in the
performance of its functions under this Act shall be defrayed by theregistration body from funds at its disposal.
(2) There shall be paid to the chairpersons and other members of
any board or committee established under this Act by a registrationbody such remuneration and allowances for expenses as theregistration body may determine and payment of such remunerationand allowances shall be made from funds at the disposal of theregistration body.
67.—(1) Summary proceedings for an offence under Part 3 ,4,5
or6may be brought and prosecuted by the registration body.
(2) Notwithstanding section 10(4) of the Petty Sessions (Ireland)
Act 1851, summary proceedings for an offence under this Act maybe commenced—
(a) within 12 months from the date on which the offence was
committed, or
(b) within 6 months from the date on which evidence
sufficient, in the opinion of the person instituting theproceedings, to justify proceedings comes to thatperson’s knowledge,
whichever is later, provided that no such proceedings shall be
commenced later than 5 years from the date on which the offenceconcerned was committed.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a certificate signed by or on
behalf of the person initiating the proceedings as to the date onwhich evidence referred to in subsection (2)(b) came to his or her
knowledge shall be evidence of that date and, in any legal[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
proceedings a document purporting to be a certificate under this
section and to be so signed shall be admitted as evidence withoutproof of the signature of the person purporting to sign the certificate,unless the contrary is shown.
(4) It shall be presumed, until the contrary is shown, that
proceedings for an offence under this Act were commenced withinthe appropriate period.
68.—(1) In any proceedings, a certificate signed by the Registrar
containing only information stated to be taken from the registrationrecords under the control of the Registrar shall be sufficient evidenceof the facts stated therein, until the contrary is shown.
(2) In any proceedings, a document purporting to be a certificate
under subsection (1) shall be deemed to be such a certificate and
to have been signed by the Registrar concerned, until the contraryis shown.
(3) A certificate under this section that purports to bear a
facsimile of the signature of the Registrar concerned or a copy ofsuch signature applied by means of a stamp or produced by acomputer shall be deemed for the purposes of this section to havebeen signed by the Registrar, until the contrary is shown.
69.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) , any persons nominated by a
registration body for appointment by the registration body to acommittee or board established under Part 3, 4 or5shall be chosen
for the purposes of such nomination by means of an election inaccordance with bye-laws made by the body under this section.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to—
(a) nominations for the purposes of the first appointments
made by a registration body of persons to a committeeor board referred to in that subsection, or
(b) the nomination of a person by a registration body for the
purposes of the person’s appointment by the body to filla casual vacancy that arises amongst the persons thesubject of those first appointments.
(3) For the purposes mentioned in subsection (1) , a registration
body shall, with the consent of the Minister, make bye-laws providingfor the election, by persons of the following class, of persons fromamong that class, namely, persons who are registered or eligible tobe registered under Part 3, 4 or5, as the case may be (and who are
not excluded from that class by virtue of bye-laws under subsection
(4)).
(4) Bye-laws made by the registration body may exclude from the
foregoing class any person who is not resident in the State at aspecified date or who does not comply with any specified conditionor requirement which the registration body considers appropriate tospecify in the bye-laws for the purposes of ensuring that the bye-lawsoperate in a practical manner.
(5) Bye-laws under this section shall provide that the election
referred to in subsection (3) shall be held by means of a ballot and
in a manner specified in the bye-laws.
67Pt.7 S.67
Evidential value of
an extract fromregister.
Nomination to
boards orcommittees andelections.Pt.7 S.69
Tenure of members
of boards, etc.,appointed byregistration body.
Proceedings at
meetings of boardsor committees.
68[No. 21.] [2007.] Building Control Act 2007 .
(6) Bye-laws under this section may provide for such
supplemental, incidental and consequential matters as theregistration body that makes them considers necessary or expedient,including the deeming of candidates to be elected without an electionhaving to be held, where the number of persons validly selected ascandidates in the proposed election is less than or equal to thenumber of vacancies in the board or committee to which theproposed election relates.
70.—(1) A person appointed by a registration body to be a
member of a board or committee established by it under this Actshall hold office for a period of 3 years, unless he or she sooner diesor resigns.
(2) No person appointed pursuant to a section of this Act shall
hold office under that section for more than 2 consecutive termsof office.
(3) A member of a board or committee referred to in subsection
(1)may resign from office by giving notice to the registration body
in writing signed by him or her and the resignation shall take effectat the next meeting of the registration body.
(4) ( a) Any requirement (whether as to consultation, obtaining of
another’s approval or otherwise) that applies with respectto the nomination of a person for appointment to a boardor committee established under this Act shall apply tothe nomination of a person for appointment to fill acasual vacancy amongst the membership of the board orcommittee.
(b) Where the term of office of a member of a board or
committee established under this Act terminatesotherwise than by reason of effluxion of time, the periodof office of the person appointed to fill the vacancyoccasioned by that other’s ceasing to hold office shall bespecified to be the unexpired period of that other’s termof office.
(5) The registration body may make rules specifying grounds
(such as repeated absence from meetings or unacceptableprofessional conduct) on which a member of a board or committeereferred to in subsection (1) may be removed from office and the
procedure for such removal and for so long as rules under thissubsection are in force such a member may be removed from officesubject to and in accordance with the rules.
71.—(1) A board or committee established under this Act by a
registration body shall hold such meetings as it considers necessaryfor the performance of its functions.
(2) The chairperson and each other member of such a board or
committee shall have a vote.
(3) At a meeting of such a board or committee, the chairperson
or, in the chairperson’s absence a member chosen by those present,shall chair the meeting.
(4) Every question at a meeting referred to in subsection (3) shall
be determined by a majority of votes of members present and the[2007.] [ No. 21.] Building Control Act 2007 .
chairperson shall have a casting vote in the event of an equal
division.
(5) The quorum for such a meeting shall be—
(a) 6 members in the case of a Professional Conduct
Committee, or
(b) 4 members in any other case,
of which, subject to subsection (6) , the majority shall be members
who were nominated for appointment as members of the board orcommittee, as the case may be, by the Minister.
(6) There may be reckoned for the purposes of that majority the
chairperson of the board or committee, as the case may be, if he orshe is present at the meeting.
(7) An Admissions Board, Technical Assessment Board, Appeals
Board or Professional Conduct Committee may perform its functionswhether or not there is a vacancy in its membership and none of itsproceedings are invalidated by any defect in the appointment of amember to it.
72.—A registration body, or a board or committee established
under this Act by a registration body, shall carry out such additionalfunctions as may be assigned to it, by regulation made by theMinister, in relation to the implementation of an act adopted by aninstitution of the European Communities with respect to therelevant profession.
73.—(1) A registration body shall, as soon as may be after the
end of each year, prepare a report of its proceedings under this Actduring that year.
(2) That report shall include a copy of the body’s accounts for the
year concerned in so far as they relate to its income and expenditurein respect of the performance of its functions under this Act duringthat year and those accounts shall be accounts that have beencertified by an auditor who has been appointed to carry out an auditof them for the year concerned.
(3) As soon as may be after the preparation of such a report, the
registration body shall cause—
(a) the report, with the copy of the foregoing accounts
included in it, to be published, and
(b) copies of the report, with the foregoing certification in
respect of those accounts included in each such copy, tobe made available for purchase by members of the public.
69Pt.7 S.71
Functions in
relation toregulations ordirectives of theCouncil of the EUor the EuropeanParliament.
Annual report by
registration body.————————
AN BILLE UM RIALU ´FOIRGNI ´OCHTA 2005
BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2005
————————
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
————————
General
In summary, this Bill provides for the following.
(1) Strengthening of Enforcement Powers of Local Building Con-
trol Authorities
 On foot of recommendations made by the Building Regu-
lations Advisory Body (BRAB), the Bill introduces revisedprocedures for issue of Fire Safety Certificate (FSC), by localBuilding Control Authorities, confirming compliance withPart B (Fire Safety) of the Building Regulations of designs ofnew Non-Domestic Buildings (offices, factories, shops, hotelsetc.) and new Apartment Blocks.
 The Bill introduces a Disability Access Certificate (DAC)
confirming that the designs of new Non -Domestic Buildingsand Apartment Blocks comply with Part M (Access forPeople with Disabilities) of the Building Regulations.
 The Bill widens the right of Building Control Authorities to
seek an Order from the High Court or the Circuit Court tostop work on buildings where there is a risk to health or safetyof persons or to stop the construction or use of new buildings,the design of which has not been granted a Disability AccessCertificate (DAC) or Fire Safety Certificate (FSC) or wherean Enforcement Notice served by the authority has not beencomplied with.
 The Bill introduces the option for Building Control Auth-
orities to bring summary prosecution for all building codeoffences in the District Court, rather than by way of pros-ecution on indictment by the DPP in the Circuit Court.
 The Bill increases the maximum penalties for breaches of the
national Building Regulations.
 The Bill provides for the recoupment of costs incurred by
Building Control Authorities in taking enforcement action forbreaches of the building code.
(2) Registration of titles of certain Building Professions
 The Bill provides that the use of titles of ‘‘Architect’’, ‘‘Quan-
tity Surveyor’’ and ‘‘Building Surveyor’’ will be confined topersons with recognised qualifications/ training/ experience,whose names are entered on a statutory register.
1Click  here  for Act2 The relevant registers will be administered by—
(a) Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland (RIAI), in the
case of Architects; and
(b) Society of Chartered Surveyors (SCS), in the case of
Building Surveyors and Quantity Surveyors.
(3) Legal Transposition of relevant parts of EU Mutual Recognition
of Professional Qualifications Directive (2005/36/EC of 7 Sep-tember 2005)
 The Parts 3, 4 and 5 of the Bill dealing with the registration of
Architects, Quantity Surveyors and Building Surveyors takeaccount of the recently adopted EU Directive 2005/36/EC of7 September 2005 on Mutual Recognition of ProfessionalQualifications
PART 1
Preliminary and General
(Sections 1 to 2)
Sections 1 and 2 contain the usual provisions of a general nature
dealing with such matters as citation, commencement, and inter-pretation.
PART 2
Amendment of Building Control Act 1990
(Sections 3 to 12)
Part 2 provides for amendments of the Building Control Act 1990.
This part provides for improvements in the processing and format ofapplications for fire safety certificates by introducing a ‘‘regulariz-ation certificate’’ and a fast track procedure in cases where com-mencement of work is imminent. Part 2 also introduces a ‘‘disabilityaccess certificate’’ whereby the design of non-domestic buildings andapartment blocks will be certified as being in compliance with PartM of the building regulations, prior to commencement of work. Fur-
thermore, Part 2 will simplify the prosecution process for BuildingControl Authorities by giving authorities the option to bring sum-mary prosecution for all building code offences in the District Court.The Bill widens the right of Building Control Authorities to seek anOrder from the High Court or the Circuit Court to stop work onbuildings where there is a risk to health or safety of persons or tothe construction or use of new buildings, the design of which has notbeen granted a Disability Access Certificate (DAC) or Fire SafetyCertificate (FSC) or where an Enforcement Notice served by theauthority has not been complied with. The Bill also empowers Build-ing Control Authorities to recoup the costs incurred in takingenforcement action for breaches of the code. Finally, Part 2 providesfor substantial increases in maximum penalties for breaches of thebuilding code.
Section 3 contains an amendment to the interpretation of section
1 of the Building Control Act, 1990.Section 4 contains an amendment to section 3 of the Building Con-
trol Act, 1990 to provide for the making of building regulations forbuilding practices that would assist in the detection or preventionof crime.
Section 5 amends section 6 of the 1990 Act by providing for
revisions to the fire safety certificate (FSC) procedures and the intro-duction of a Disability Access Certificate as follows:
(i) a 7-day notice may be submitted to a building control auth-
ority where commencement of work is imminent, to beaccompanied by a valid fire safety certificate togetherwith a statutory declaration by the applicant in respect ofthe certificate and any necessary modification to workscarried out prior to the granting of the relevant firesafety certificate.
(ii) provision is made for application for a revised fire safety
certificate in cases where a revised design of a building isnecessary, following the grant of planning permission.
(iii) provision is made for application for a ‘‘Regularization Cer-
tificate’’ in cases where works have been carried out with-out a fire safety certificate, to be accompanied by as con-structed drawings and a certificate stating that the worksare in compliance with the requirements of the fire safetyrequirements of the building regulations.
(iv) provision is made for the granting, by the local Building Con-
trol Authority, of a Disability Access Certificate (DAC)for non domestic buildings and apartment blocks to cer-tify that the design, in the opinion of the building controlauthority, complies with Part M of the buildingregulations.
(v) the opening, operation or occupation of buildings which
require a fire safety certificate or disability access certifi-cate is prohibited until DAC and FSC certificates aregranted.
Section 6 amends Section 7 of the 1990 Act by providing for an
appeal to An Bord Pleana ´la in respect of refusal of or conditions
attached by Building Control Authorities to Regularisation Certifi-cates or Disability Access Certificates under Section 5.
Section 7 amends Section 7 of the 1990 Act by providing new
sections 7A an d 7 B for the setting of fees by An Bord Pleana ´la and
the legal basis for making of certain regulations.
Section 8 amends Section 8 of the 1990 Act by providing for the
recoupment of costs incurred by a Building Control Authority inserving an enforcement notice.
Section 9 amends Section 9 of the 1990 Act by providing, where
an application has been made to the District Court in relation to anenforcement notice, for the recoupment of costs incurred by a Build-ing Control Authority, if so ordered by the Court
Section 10 amends Section 12 of the 1990 Act by extending the
power of Building Control Authorities to seek an Order from theHigh Court or the Circuit Court to stop work on buildings wherethere is a risk to health or safety of persons or for the removal,alteration or making safe of a building or works which have been
34commenced or completed without a fire safety, disability or reg-
ularization certificate where such certificate was required or the dis-continuance of works, or restricting or prohibiting the use of thebuilding until such certificates have been granted. It also provides forthe recoupment of prosecution costs incurred by a Building ControlAuthority, if so ordered by the Court
Section 11 amends section 17 of the 1990 Act to provide for the
option for Building Control Authorities to bring summary pros-ecution for all building code offences under the Act in the DistrictCourt. It also increases the maximum fines for summary convictionsfor offences under the Act from £800 ( \1,000) to \5,000; and from
£150 ( \190) per day to \500 per day for ongoing offences. The
maximum fine for conviction on indictment is increased from £10,000(\12,500) to \50,000.
Section 12 provides for the insertion of three new sections 17A,
17B and 17C to the 1990 Act. The new Section 17A provides forpayment of fines to a local Building Control Authority where thefine results from a prosecution brought by the authority. The newSection 17B provides for the recoupment of prosecution costsincurred by a building control authority, if so ordered by the Court.Section 17C provides for the evidential value of electronically storedbuilding control records in any prosecutions under the Act.
PART 3
Registration of Architects
(Sections 13 to 27)
Part 3 provides for statutory protection of the title of ‘‘Architect’’
by restricting the lawful use of the title to suitably qualified personswhose names are entered on a statutory register to be established inaccordance with the provisions of this Part. The registration systemwill be administered by the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland
(RIAI). This Part also specifies criteria for automatic eligibility for
admission to the Architects register. It provides for the setting up ofan Admissions Board, a Technical Assessment Board, and a Pro-fessional Conduct Committee. Part 3 further provides for an AppealsBoard to determine appeals against decisions of any of the aforemen-tioned Boards or Committee, with an ultimate right of appeal againstdecisions of the Appeals Board to the High Court. Finally, Part 3provides for payment of a registration fees, the appointment of aRegistrar, and for fines or penalties for misuse of the title of‘‘Architect’’.
Section 13 designates the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland
(RIAI) as the registration body and as the competent authorityunder Directive 2005/36/EC for this part. It provides that the regis-tration body must establish an Admissions Board for the purpose ofregistering members of the architectural profession. Membership ofthe Board will be comprised of a Chairperson and 7 members asfollows:
(i) 3 architects to be nominated by the registration body
(ii) 4 persons (who are not architects) are to be nominated by
the Minister(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 14 sets out the eligibility criteria for admission to the archi-
tects register for persons holding approved qualifications, includingnationals of EU Member States, the European Economic Area(EEA), the Swiss Confederation and Third Countries. It also pro-vides that membership of the registration body is not a prerequisitefor registration and that the same registration fee will apply tomembers and non-members of the body.
Section 15 sets out the detailed criteria for registration of persons
who are nationals of EU Member States, and the European Econ-omic Area in accordance with EU obligations. It includes nationalsor residents of States which are members of the World TradeOrganisation.
Section 16 provides for application for recognition of qualifications
by a further category of persons from Member States who are eli-gible to apply to the Admissions Board for registration under EUDirective 2005/36/EC (Chapter 1, Title III). It sets out the pro-cedures for assessment of such applications, including the proceduresfor interview by the Board, or the undertaking of an aptitude test/adaptation period, where such is considered necessary. The Boardmust make its decision on the application within a 3 month periodof the date of receipt of a valid application. There is provision forextending the period for assessment by 1 extra month in specifiedcases.
Section 17 provides for the payment of prescribed registration fees
and annual retention fees to the registration body. The Registrarmay remove the names of registrants from the register for non-pay-ment of retention fees within two months of sending of a secondnotice by pre-paid post. Names may be restored to the register onpayment of the fee. In cases of verified hardship, the Registrar mayremit all or part of the fee.
Section 18 makes it an offence for persons to use the title ‘‘archi-
tect’’, unless entitled to do so, either alone or in combination witheither names, letters, titles or descriptions to imply that they areregistered; with intent to deceive, makes use of a certificate issuedunder the Act; makes a false declaration for the purpose of obtainingregistration, aids or abets any such action, or practices any businessunder the name or title containing the word ‘‘architect’’. Persons whodo so, will be guilty of an offence and will be liable on summaryprosecution to a fine of \5,000 and \500 for each day of an ongoing
offence, and/or imprisonment for a term of not exceeding 12 months.
Section 19 enables the registration body to appoint a Registrar for
keeping an updated register of the names of persons registered. Itwill also decide on the format of the register. Following registration,a certificate will be forwarded to the registrant. The Registrar willensure that the register is available for public inspection duringworking hours. It also provides for payment of a salary or fee tothe Registrar by the registration body who may also pay pensioncontributions and travel allowances.
Section 20 enables a registrant to apply to have his/her name
removed from the register and to subsequently apply for restoration.An application for removal from a registrant will not be consideredwhile an investigation is underway by the Professional Conduct Com-mittee until such proceedings have been completed and necessary
56action decided. Nothing in this section will prevent the Professional
Conduct Committee from refusing to restore a person’s name to theregister on the grounds of unfitness to practice architecture orattaching certain conditions to the entry, whereupon the registrarwill notify the person of the decision taken, the date and thereasons therefore.
Section 21 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of a Technical Assessment Board to consider applications for regis-tration from persons who are not eligible for registration underSection 14. The Board will be comprised of a Chairperson and 7members as follows:
(i) 3 architects to be nominated by the registration body
(ii) 4 persons (who are not architects) to be nominated by the
Minister
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court.
The Technical Assessment Board shall appoint a panel of archi-
tects for assessment of applications under Section 22.
Section 22 provides for the procedure of the Technical Assessment
Board in the assessment of applications from persons who have 10years experience in the field of architecture in the State, on the com-mencement date of the section. It cites the documentation to be sub-mitted by applicants for registration, the criteria and format to beused for assessment of applications. It specifies that the Board mayinterview applicants, if considered necessary. Where interviews areconsidered necessary, 4 board members will be present and the inter-view may be recorded in writing or any other format as the boardmay decide. The interviewee may, at his/her own expense, beaccompanied by a professional advisor, including a lawyer. Appli-cants must be notified of the decision taken by the Board. Where adecision is favourable, the board will notify the registrar who willarrange to register the applicant, on payment of appropriate fee.
Section 23 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of a Professional Conduct Committee to examine complaints madein regard to alleged professional misconduct. The Board will be com-prised of a Chairperson and 11 members as follows:
(i) 5 architects to be nominated by the registration body
(ii) 6 persons (who are not architects) to be nominated by the
Minister,1 of whom will be nominated by the Ministerwith the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Tradeand Employment
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, with
the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment, will be a solicitor, barrister or a formerjudge of the Circuit Court, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 24 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of an Appeals Board. The Board will be comprised of a Chairpersonand 5 members as follows:(i) 2 architects to be nominated by the registration body, neither
of whom will be a member of any other Board or Com-mittee established under this Part
(ii) 3 persons (who are not architects), 2 of whom will be nomi-
nated by the Minister and 1 will be nominated by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise,Trade and Employment, none of whom will be a memberof any other Board or Committee established under thisPart
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 25 sets out the procedures for making an appeal to the
Appeals Board by persons who are adversely affected by decisionsof the Admissions Board, the Technical Assessment Board or theProfessional Conduct Committee. It details the requirements for pro-cessing of the appeal by the Board and informing the appellant ofthe outcome of the appeal. The appeal must be in writing, relate toeither procedural or substantive matters and be lodged within 3months of the date of the decision being appealed. A witness at ahearing will have the same immunities and privileges as a witnessbefore the High Court.
The procedures of the Appeals Board shall make provision for:
(i) notification of the appellant, the Chairperson of the relevant
Board or Committee, and any other person whose evi-dence may be required to attend before the Board on aparticular date and time at a specified venue
(ii) advising the appellant of the right to present the case or, at
their own expense, through a legal representative
(iii) the examination of witnesses(iv) whether evidence should be taken under oath
(v) recording of evidence
The Board, having considered an appeal, may:
(i) confirm the decision of the relevant Board or Committee,
subject to an amendment
(ii) annul the decision and direct the relevant Board or Commit-
tee to make a new decision, or
(iii) give such other direction as it thinks fit
The Chairperson shall then notify the appellant by pre-paid regis-
tered post of the decision taken, the date of same and the reasonsfor the decision, and of the appellant’s right of appeal to the HighCourt. The relevant Board or Committee against whose decision theappeal was lodged shall also be informed of the decision. Where theappellant had made a complaint to the Professional Conduct Com-mittee under Part 6, the registered architect against whom the com-plaint was made, shall also be notified of the decision of the Board.
Section 26 provides for the right of appeal to the High Court by
persons adversely affected by a decision of the Appeals Board. The
78appeal must be lodged within 3 months of the date of the decision
of the Appeals Board. The Court may—
(i) confirm the decision of the Appeals Board , subject to any
amendment the Court may decide
(ii) overturn the decision and direct the Appeals Board to make
a new decision
(iii) give any other direction the Court thinks fit
In the case of an appeal from a decision of the Professional Con-
duct Committee, the Court may admit evidence of a person of stand-ing in the architectural profession as to what constitutes professionalmisconduct. The Court may also direct how the costs of the appli-cation are to be borne.
Section 27 provides that the Appeals Board will also have juris-
diction in the case of complaints arising from non- decisions by therelevant Board within the period specified under Section 15 (5) orsection 16 (11) in assessment of applications for registration.
PART 4
Registration of Quantity Surveyors
(Sections 28 to 41)
Part 4 specifies the statutory protection of the title of ‘‘Quantity
Surveyor’’ by limiting the lawful use of this title to suitably qualifiedpersons whose names are entered on a statutory register. The regis-tration system will be administered by the Society of Chartered Sur-
veyors (SCS) . Part 4 also specifies the criteria for automatic eligibility
for admission to the relevant register. It provides for the setting upof an Admissions Board, a Technical Assessment Board, and a Pro-fessional Conduct Committee. Part 4 further provides for an AppealsBoard to determine appeals against decisions of any of the aforemen-tioned Boards, with an ultimate right of appeal against decisions ofthe Appeals Board to the High Court. Finally Part 4 provides forpayment of registration fees and appointment of a Registrar and forthe determination of fines or penalties for misuse of the title of‘‘Quantity Surveyor’’.
Section 28 designates the Society of Chartered Surveyors as the
registration body under this Part, and as the competent authority forquantity surveyors in the State. It provides that the registration bodymust establish an Admissions Board for the purpose of registeringmembers of the quantity surveying profession. Membership of theBoard will be comprised of a Chairperson and 7 members as follows:
(i) 3 quantity surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies
(ii) 4 persons (who are not quantity surveyors) are to be nomi-
nated by the Minister
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 29 sets out the eligibility criteria for admission to the quan-
tity surveyors register for persons holding approved qualifications,including nationals of EU Member States, the European Economic
Area in accordance with EU obligations. It includes nationals or resi-dents of States which are members of the World Trade Organisationand Third Countries.
It also provides that membership of the registration body is not a
prerequisite for registration and that the same registration fee willapply to members and non-members of the body.
Section 30 provides for application for recognition of qualifications
by persons from Member States who are eligible to apply to theAdmissions Board for registration under EU Directive 2005/36/EC(Chapter 1, Title III). It sets out the procedures for assessment ofsuch applications, including the procedures for interview by theBoard, or the undertaking of an aptitude test/adaptation period,where such is considered necessary. The Board must make itsdecision on the application withi n a 3 month period of the date of
receipt of a valid application. There is provision for extending theperiod for assessment by 1 extra month in specified cases.
Section 31 provides for the payment of prescribed registration fees
and annual retention fees to the registration body. The Registrarmay remove the names of registrants from the register for non-pay-ment of retention fees within two months of sending of a secondnotice by pre-paid post. Names may be restored to the register onpayment of the fee. In cases of verified hardship, the Registrar mayremit all or part of the fee.
Section 32 makes it an offence for persons to use the title ‘‘quantity
surveyor’’, unless entitled to do so, either alone or in combinationwith either names, letters, titles or descriptions to imply that they areregistered; with intent to deceive, makes use of a certificate issuedunder the Act; makes a false declaration for the purpose of obtainingregistration, or aids or abets any such action: practices any businessunder the name or title containing the word ‘‘quantity surveyor’’.Persons who do so, will be guilty of an offence and will be liable onsummary prosecution to a fine of \5,000 and \500 for each day of
an ongoing offence and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding12 months.
Section 33 enables the registration body to appoint a Registrar for
keeping an updated register of the names of persons registered. Itwill also decide on the format of the register. Following registration,a certificate will be forwarded to the registrant. The Register will beavailable for public inspection during working hours. It also providesfor payment of a salary or fee to the Registrar by the registrationbody who may also pay pension contributions and travel allowances.
Section 34 enables a registrant to apply to have his/her name
removed from the register and to subsequently apply for restoration.An application for removal from a registrant will not be consideredwhile an investigation is underway by the Professional Conduct Com-mittee until such proceedings have been completed and necessaryaction decided. Nothing in this section will prevent the ProfessionalConduct Committee from refusing to restore a person’s name to theregister on the grounds of unfitness to practice quantity surveying orattaching certain conditions to the entry, whereupon the Registrarwill notify the person of the decision taken, the date and thereasons therefore.
Section 35 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of a Technical Assessment Board to consider applications for regis-tration from persons who are not eligible for registration under
910Section 26. The Board will be comprised of a Chairperson and 7
members as follows:
(i) 3 quantity surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies
(ii) 4 persons (who are not quantity surveyors) to be nominated
by the Minister
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 36 provides for the procedure of the Technical Assessment
Board in assessing applications from certain persons who have 8 or10 years experience in the field of quantity surveying in the State, onthe commencement date of the section. It cites the documentationto be submitted by applicants for registration, the criteria and formatto be used for assessment of applications. It specifies that the boardmay interview applicants, if considered necessary. Where interviewsare considered necessary, 4 board members will be present and theinterview may be recorded in writing or any other format as theboard may decide. The interviewee may, at his/her own expense, beaccompanied by a professional advisor, including a lawyer. Appli-cants must be notified of the decision of the Board. Where a decisionis favourable, the board will notify the registrar who will arrange toregister the applicant, on payment of appropriate fee.
Section 37 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of a Professional Conduct Committee to examine complaints madein regard to alleged professional misconduct . The Board will becomprised of a Chairperson and 11 members as follows:
(i) 5 quantity surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies
(ii) 6 persons (who are not quantity surveyors) to be nominated
by the Minister, 1 of whom will be nominated by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise,Trade and Employment
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, with
the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment, will be a solicitor, barrister or a formerjudge of the Circuit Court, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 38 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of an Appeals Board. The Board will be comprised of a Chairpersonand 5 members as follows:
(i) 2 quantity surveyors, to be nominated by the registration
body following consultation with certain bodies, neitherof whom will be a member of any Board or Committeeestablished under this Part
(ii) 3 persons (who are not quantity surveyors), to be nominated
by the Minister, 1 of whom will be nominated by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise,Trade and Employment, none of whom will be a memberof any Board or Committee established under this Part(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court.
Section 39 sets out the procedures for making of an appeal by
persons who are adversely affected by decisions of the AdmissionsBoard, the Technical Assessment Board or the Professional ConductCommittee. It details the requirements for processing of the appealby the Board and informing the appellant of the outcome of theappeal. The appeal must be in writing, relate to either procedural orsubstantive matters and be lodged within 3 months of the date of thedecision being appealed. A witness at a hearing will have the sameimmunities and privileges as a witness before the High Court.
The procedures of the Appeals Board shall make provision for:
(i) notification of the appellant, the Chairperson of the relevant
Board or Committee, and any other person whose evi-dence may be required to attend before the Board on aparticular date and time at a specified venue
(ii) advising the appellant of the right to present the case or, at
their own expense, through a legal representative
(iii) the examination of witnesses(iv) whether evidence should be taken under oath
(v) recording of evidence
The Board, having considered an appeal, may:
(i) confirm the decision of the relevant Board or Committee,
subject to an amendment
(ii) annul the decision and direct the relevant Board or Commit-
tee to make a new decision, or
(iii) give such other direction as it thinks fit
The Chairperson shall then notify the appellant by pre-paid regis-
tered post of the decision taken, the date of same and the reasonsfor that decision and of the appellant’s right of appeal to the HighCourt. The relevant Board or Committee against whose decision theappeal was lodged shall also be informed of the decision. Where theappellant had made a complaint to the Professional Conduct Com-mittee under Part 6, the registered quantity surveyor against whomthe complaint was made, shall also be notified of the decision ofthe Board.
Section 40 provides for the right of appeal to the High Court by
persons adversely affected by a decision of the Appeals Board. Theappeal must be lodged within 3 months of the date of the decisionof the Appeals Board. The Court may—
(i) confirm the decision of the Appeals Board, subject to any
amendment the Court may decide
(ii) overturn the decision and direct the Appeals Board to make
a new decision
(iii) give any other direction the Court thinks fit
1112In the case of an appeal from a decision of the Professional Con-
duct Committee, the Court may admit evidence of a person of stand-ing in the quantity surveying profession as to what constitutes pro-fessional misconduct or poor professional performance. The Courtmay also direct how the costs of the application are to be borne
Section 41 provides that the Appeals Board will also have juris-
diction in the case of complaints arising from non- decisions by therelevant Board within the period specified under Section 30(12) orsection 30(13) in assessment of applications for registration.
PART 5
Registration of Building Surveyors
(Sections 42 to 55)
Part 5 provides for the statutory protection of the title of ‘‘Building
Surveyor’’ by restricting the lawful use of the title to suitably quali-fied persons whose names are entered on a statutory register. Theregistration system will be administered by the Society of Chartered
Surveyors (SCS). Part 5 also specifies the criteria for automatic eligi-
bility for admission to the register of Building Surveyors. It providesfor the setting up of an Admissions Board, A Technical AssessmentBoard, and a Professional Conduct Committee. Part 5 further pro-vides for establishment of an Appeals Board to determine appealsagainst decisions of any of the aforementioned Boards or Commit-tee, with an ultimate right of appeal against decisions of the AppealsBoard to the High Court. Finally Part 5 provides for payment ofregistration fees and appointment of a Registrar and for the determi-nation of fines or penalties for misuse of the title of ‘‘ BuildingSurveyor’’.
Section 42 designates the Society of Chartered Surveyors (SCS) as
the registration body under this Part and as the competent authorityfor building surveyors in the State. It provides that the registrationbody must establish an Admissions Board for the purpose of regis-tering members of the building surveying profession. Membershipof the Board will be comprised of a Chairperson and 7 membersas follows:
(i) 3 building surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies
(ii) 4 persons (who are not building surveyors) to be nominated
by the Minister
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court
Section 43 sets out the eligibility criteria for admission to the
building surveyor’s register for persons holding approved qualifi-cations, including nationals of EU Member States, and the EuropeanEconomic Area in accordance with EU obligations. It includesnationals or residents of States which are members of the WorldTrade Organisation and Third Countries.
It also provides that membership of the registration body is not a
prerequisite for registration and that the same registration fee willapply to members and non-members of the body.Section 44 provides for application for recognition of qualifications
by persons from Member States who are eligible to apply to theAdmissions Board for registration under EU Directive 2005/36/EC(Chapter 1, Title III). It sets out the procedures for assessment ofsuch applications, including the procedures for interview by theBoard, the undertaking of an aptitude test/adaptation period, wheresuch is considered necessary. The Board must make its decision onthe application within a 3 month period of the date of receipt ofa valid application. There is provision for extending the period forassessment by 1 extra month in specified cases.
Section 45 provides for the payment of prescribed registration fees
and annual retention fees to the registration body. The Registrarmay remove the names of registrants from the register for non-pay-ment of retention fees within two months of sending of a secondnotice by pre-paid post. Names may be restored to the register onpayment of the fee. In cases of verified hardship, the Registrar mayremit all or part of the fee.
Section 46 makes it an offence for persons to use the title ‘‘building
surveyor’’, unless entitled to do so, either alone or in combinationwith either names, letters, titles or descriptions to imply that they areregistered; with intent to deceive, makes use of a certificate issuedunder the Act; makes a false declaration for the purpose of obtainingregistration , or aids or abets any such action: practices any businessunder the name or title containing the word ‘‘building surveyor’’ .Persons who do so, will be guilty of an offence and will be liable onsummary prosecution to a fine of \5,000 and \500 for each day of an
ongoing offence, and/or imprisonment for a term of not exceeding12 months.
Section 47 enables the registration body to appoint a Registrar for
keeping an updated register of the names of persons registered. Itwill also decide on the format of the register. On registration, a cer-tificate will be forwarded to the registrant. The register will be avail-able for public inspection during working hours. It also provides forpayment of a salary or fee to the Registrar by the registration bodywho may also pay pension contributions and travel allowances.
Section 48 enables a registrant to apply to have his/her name
removed from the register and to subsequently apply for restoration.An application for removal from a registrant will not be consideredwhile an investigation is underway by the Professional Conduct Com-mittee until such proceedings have been completed and necessaryaction decided. Nothing in this section will prevent the ProfessionalConduct Committee from refusing to restore a person’s name to the
register on the grounds of unfitness to practice building surveying orattaching certain conditions to the entry, whereupon the Registrarwill notify the person of the decision taken, the date and thereasons therefore.
Section 49 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of a Technical Assessment Board to consider applications for regis-tration from persons who are not eligible for registration underSection 40. The Board will be comprised of a Chairperson and 7members as follows:
(i) 3 building surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies
(ii) 4 persons (who are not building surveyors) to be nominated
by the Minister
1314(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court
Section 50 provides for the procedure of the Technical Assessment
Board in assessing applications from certain persons who have 8 or10 years experience in the field of building surveying in the State, onthe commencement date of the Section. It cites the documentationto be submitted by applicants for registration, the criteria and formatto be used for assessment of applications. It specifies that the Boardmay interview applicants, if considered necessary. Where interviewsare considered necessary, 4 board members will be present and theinterview may be recorded in writing or any other format as theboard may decide. The interviewee may, at his/her own expense, beaccompanied by a professional advisor, including a lawyer. Appli-cants must be notified of the decision of the Board. Where a decisionis favourable, the board will notify the Registrar who will arrange toregister the applicant, on payment of appropriate fee.
Section 51 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of a Professional Conduct Committee to examine complaints madein regard to alleged professional misconduct. The Board will be com-prised of a Chairperson and 11 members as follows:
(i) 5 building surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies
(ii) 6 persons (who are not building surveyors) to be nominated
by the Minister, 1 of whom will be nominated by theMinister with the consent of the Minister for Enterprise,Trade and Employment
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, with
the consent of the Minister for Enterprise, Trade andEmployment, will be a solicitor, barrister or a formerjudge of the Circuit Court, High Court or Supreme Court
Section 52 provides for the establishment by the registration body
of an Appeals Board. The Board will be comprised of a Chairpersonand 5 members as follows:
(i) 2 building surveyors to be nominated by the registration
body, following consultation with certain bodies, neitherof whom will be a member of any Board set up underthis Part
(ii) 3 persons (who are not building surveyors), 2 of whom will
be nominated by the Minister and 1 will be nominated bythe Minister with the consent of the Minister forEnterprise, Trade and Employment, none of whom willbe a member of any Board or Committee establishedunder this Part
(iii) the chairperson, who will be appointed by the Minister, will
be a solicitor, barrister or a former judge of the CircuitCourt, High Court or Supreme Court
Section 53 sets out the procedures for making of an appeal by
persons who are adversely affected by decisions of the AdmissionsBoard, the Technical Assessment Board or the Professional ConductCommittee. It details the requirements for processing of the appealby the Board and informing the appellant of the outcome of theappeal. The appeal must be in writing, relate to either procedural orsubstantive matters and be lodged within 3 months of the date of the
decision being appealed. A witness at a hearing will have the sameimmunities and privileges as a witness before the High Court.
The procedures of the Appeals Board shall make provision for:
(i) notification of the appellant, the Chairperson of the relevant
Board or Committee, and any other person whose evi-dence may be required to attend before the Board on aparticular date and time at a specified venue
(ii) advising the appellant of the right to present the case or, at
their own expense, through a legal representative
(iii) the examination of witnesses(iv) whether evidence should be taken under oath
(v) recording of evidence
The Appeals Board, having considered an appeal, may:
(i) confirm the decision of the relevant Board or Committee,
subject to an amendment
(ii) annul the decision and direct the relevant Board or Commit-
tee to make a new decision, or
(iii) give such other direction as it thinks fit
The Chairperson of the Appeals Board shall then notify the
appellant by pre-paid registered post of the decision taken, the dateof same and the reasons for that decision and of the appellant’s rightof appeal to the High Court. The relevant Board or Committeeagainst whose decision the appeal was lodged shall also be informedof the decision. Where the appellant had made a complaint to theProfessional Conduct Committee under Part 6, the registered build-ing surveyor against whom the complaint was made, shall also benotified of the decision of the Board.
Section 54 provides for the right of appeal to the High Court by
persons adversely affected by a decision of the Appeals Board. Theappeal must be lodged within 3 months of the date of the decisionof the Appeals Board. The Court may—
(i) confirm the decision of the Appeals Board, subject to any
amendment the Court may decide
(ii) overturn the decision and direct the Appeals Board to make
a new decision
(iii) give any other direction the Court thinks fit
In the case of an appeal from a decision of the Professional Con-
duct Committee, the Court may admit evidence of a person of stand-ing in the building surveyor profession as to what constitutes pro-fessional misconduct or poor professional performance. The Courtmay also direct how the costs of the application are to be borne.
Section 55 provides that the Appeals Board will also have juris-
diction in the case of complaints arising from non- decisions by therelevant Board within the period specified under Section 44 (12) orsection 44 (13) in assessment of applications for registration.
1516PART 6
Fitness To Practice
(Sections 56 to 59)
Section 56 enables the registration bodies to prepare a Code of
Professional Conduct and standards to which registered professionalsmust adhere. The code may be reviewed from time to time, as con-sidered necessary by the registration bodies. There is a requirementfor a public consultation process together with consultation with theCompetition Authority. A copy of the code will be available, at areasonable charge, or without charge as may be determined by theregistration bodies.
Section 57 sets out the procedures for examination of a complaint
made to the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) and the con-duct of an inquiry into alleged professional misconduct or poor pro-fessional performance of a registered professional. Where the Com-mittee decides that a prima facie case has not been made for aninquiry, it will inform the complainant in writing of the decision.
The PCC, following consideration of the complaint and if con-
sidered appropriate, may provide for resolution of the complaintinitially by mediation between the parties to the complaint, before aperson/persons appointed by the relevant registration body. Wheremediation is unsuccessful, the Committee must proceed to examinethe complaint.
Provision is made whereby the Chairperson of the PCC will inform
the members of the Committee and the complainant of the date,time and venue for the hearing. The notification to the registrant willoutline the details of the complaint and advise of his/her right toappear before the Committee and be represented by a person ofhis/her choice.
The PCC, when acting under this section will have the powers,
rights or privileges vested in the High Court or a judge of the HighCourt in regard to enforcing the attendance of witnesses, examiningwitnesses under oath or compelling the production of documents.Witnesses appearing at an inquiry under this section will have thesame immunities and privileges as witnesses before the High Court.
On completion of an inquiry, the PCC must produce a report
embodying its findings, to include the nature of the complaint andthe evidence before it. The findings of the Committee will not bemade public, without the consent of the registrant who has been thesubject of the complaint, unless he/she has been found guilty of pro-fessional misconduct or poor professional performance by theCommittee.
Where the PCC has found the registrant not guilty of professional
misconduct or poor professional performance, it must so notify thecomplainant and advise of the right of appeal to the Appeals Board.Persons who fail to attend a hearing, fail to produce necessarydocuments or refuse to take an oath or answer questions which theCommittee may lawfully ask, will be guilty of an offence and will beliable, on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \5,000 and
\500 for each day of an ongoing offence and /or to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 12 months.
Section 58 provides that where the PCC finds there has been no
professional misconduct or poor professional performance by theregistrant, it will notify the complainant and the registrant of the
decision and take no further action. Where the Committee finds thata registrant is guilty of professional misconduct or poor professionalperformance it may do one or more of the following:
— advise, admonish or censure the registrant;— impose a fine of a specified amount, which, if unpaid after a
2 month period has elapsed following notification of the fine,the Registrar may strike the registrant’s name from theregister;
— suspend the registrant from the register with provision to
reapply for admission after a specified period;
— erase the registrant’s name from the register permanently;— allow for the registrant’s name to remain in the register sub-
ject to the imposition of certain conditions for so remainingas it considers appropriate, to be complied with by theregistrant.
The Chairperson of the PCC must inform the registrant by pre-
paid registered post of the decision, the date thereof and the reasonsfor that decision and of the registrants right to appeal to the AppealsBoard. The decision of the PCC must be stayed where the registrantappeals to the Appeal Board within the specified period, until theappeal is disposed of, to include the time specified for appeal to theHigh Court.
Where no appeal is made against the decision of the PCC, or an
appeal is made and has been disposed of, and where the decision ofthe Committee to strike the registrant from the register has beenupheld, the Registrar may apply to the High Court for confirmationof the decision and the Court shall, on hearing the application, unlessit sees good reason to the contrary, confirm the decision and eitherdirect the registrar to remove the registrant’s name from the registeror direct that during a specified date ( beginning not earlier than 7days after the decision of the Court) registration of the professional’sname shall not have effect.
The Registrar must notify the registrant by pre- paid registered
post of either direction of the Court. The name of a registrant which
has been erased or suspended under this section , may be restoredto the register on the direction of the PCC, subject to any conditionsspecified, including payment of a fee which must not exceed theinitial registration fee.
Section 59 provides that the proceedings of or communications by
the PCC in the course of an inquiry, and any reports made in theexercise of its powers, duties or functions under this Part are absol-utely privileged in any action for defamation.
PART 7
Miscellaneous Provisions
(Sections 60 to 73)
Section 60 provides for temporary registration where architectural,
quantity surveying or building surveying services are provided on a
1718temporary or occasional basis in the State, in accordance with the
Directive. It outlines the procedures for such registration.
Section 61 provides that a registration body may arrange for assist-
ance from persons for any Board or Committee for the proper dis-charge of certain functions. A registration body may also make rulesto facilitate the execution of its functions and those of any board orcommittee, including the Appeals Board, as provided for under thisAct. The registration body must publish the draft rules and circulatethem to the board or committee affected by their requirements.
Section 62 provides that the registration body may prescribe the
payment of fees, subject to the approval of the Minister for thefollowing:
(i) processing applications for registration ;
(ii) the annual retention of a name in the register maintained by
the Body;
(iii) restoring the name of any person in the register following
removal pursuant to the provisions of the Act;
(iv) removing the name of any person from the register on the
application of that person;
(v) entering additional qualifications of any person in the regis-
ter, not being qualifications required for registration;
(vi) issuing a certificate of registration;
(vii) provision of any other service by the registration body.
Section 63 provides that a registrant may, on payment of a speci-
fied fee, apply to the registration body to have additional qualifi-cations entered in the register. The registration body will decide whatadditional qualifications, other than those required for registration,may be entered in the register.
Section 64 provides that the Minister may make regulations for
prescribing any matter referred to in the Act as prescribed or to beprescribed, or in relation to any matter referred to as the subject ofregulations. Regulations may contain such incidental, supplementaland consequential provisions as the Minister considers necessary orexpedient. It also includes the standard provision for the laying ofregulations before both Houses of the Oireachtas.
Section 65 provides that the Registrar, in order to keep the register
correct and updated, will be obliged to correct all errors in the regis-ter and to remove entries procured by fraud or misrepresentation;to amend addresses where necessary and to remove the names ofprofessionals who are deceased. On taking such action, the Registrarmust notify the persons concerned or the next of kin, if such personcan be identified, of the action taken and the reason therefor.
Section 66 provides that expenses incurred in administrative func-
tions under the Act by the registration body shall be defrayed bythe body from funds at its disposal. It also provides for payment ofremuneration and allowances for expenses of the chairpersons andmembers of any board or committee established under the Act, tobe determined by the registration body, which shall be paid from thefunds at the disposal of the body.Section 67 provides that summary proceedings for offences under
Part 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Act may be brought and prosecuted bythe registration body. Notwithstanding the provisions of the PettySessions (Ireland) Act 1851, summary proceedings may be com-menced within 12 months from the date of the offence or within 6months from the date on which sufficient evidence to justify pro-ceedings, comes to the knowledge of the person instituting the pro-ceedings, whichever is later. However, no such proceedings can becommenced later than 5 years from the date of the offence commit-ted. A certificate signed by the person shall be admitted as evidencein any legal proceedings as to the date or dates such evidence cameto his or her knowledge, without proof of the signature of the person,unless the contrary is shown.
Section 68 provides that in any legal proceedings, a certificate
signed by the relevant registrar containing only information statedto be taken from registration records will be sufficient evidence ofthe facts contained therein , unless proved to the contrary. Certifi-cates of registration data stored in electronic format or photographic,digitized or other modern format will have evidential value.
Section 69 provides the procedure for the nomination of persons
for appointment by the registration body to any Board or Commit-tee. The nomination (excluding first appointments) shall be by meansof an election in accordance with bye -laws made by the body, withthe consent of the Minister.
Section 70 determines the term of office of members of boards or
committees at 3 years, unless he or she sooner dies or resigns. Amember shall not serve for more than 2 consecutive terms of office.It also provides a procedure for resignation of members, filling ofcasual vacancies and where the registration body may providegrounds for removal of a member from office and the procedure forso doing.
Section 71 provides for the procedures to be followed at meetings
of any board or committee established under the Act. The quorumfor such meetings shall be 6 members in the case of a ProfessionalConduct Committee or 4 members in any other case.
Section 72 provides that a registration body shall carry out any
additional functions assigned to it by Order made by the Ministerrelating to the implementation of an act adopted by an institution ofthe EU in regard to the relevant professions.
Section 73 provides that the registration body shall prepare an
annual report on proceedings under the Act , to include accountdetails as certified by an auditor. The report must be published andput on sale as soon as may be.
An Roinn Comshaoil Oidhreachta agus Rialtais Aitiuil
Aibrean 2007
Wt. —. 572. 5/07. Cahill. (X51207). Gr. 30-15.
19