————————
Number 19of2009
————————
CRIMINAL JUSTICE (SURVEILLANCE) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Interpretation.
2. Application of Act.3. Surveillance.4. Application for authorisation.5. Authorisation.6. Variation or renewal of authorisation.7. Approval for surveillance in cases of urgency.8. Tracking devices.9. Retention of materials relating to applications and reports.
10. Restriction of disclosure of existence of authorisations and
other documents.
11. Complaints procedure.12. Review of operation of this Act by designated judge.13. Confidentiality of information.14. Admissibility of evidence.15. Disclosure of information.16. Regulations.17. Amendment of Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act 2005.
18. Amendment of Courts (Supplemental Provisions) Act 1961.19. Short title.
————————
12[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
Acts Referred to
Courts (Supplemental Provisions) Act 1961 1961, No. 39
Criminal Justice Act 1984 1984, No. 22Criminal Justice Act 2006 2006, No. 26Criminal Justice (Terrorist Offences) Act 2005 2005, No. 2Criminal Law Act 1997 1997, No. 14Customs Consolidation Act 1876 39 & 40, Vict. Ch. 36Defence (Amendment) Act 1979 1979, No. 1Defence (Amendment) Act 1990 1990, No. 6Defence Act 1954 1954, No. 18Finance Act 1999 1999, No. 2Finance Act 2001 2001, No. 7Finance Act 2003 2003, No. 3Finance Act 2005 2005, No. 5Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act 2005 2005, No. 20
Interception of Postal Packets and Telecommunications
Messages (Regulation) Act 1993 1993, No. 10
Postal and Telecommunications Services Act 1983 1983, No. 24Taxes Consolidation Act 1997 1997, No. 39————————
Number 19of2009
————————
CRIMINAL JUSTICE (SURVEILLANCE) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR SURVEILLANCE IN CONNEC-
TION WITH THE INVESTIGATION OF ARRESTABLEOFFENCES, THE PREVENTION OF SUSPECTEDARRESTABLE OFFENCES AND THE SAFEGUARDINGOF THE STATE AGAINST SUBVERSIVE AND TERROR-IST THREATS, TO AMEND THE GARDA SI ´OCHA ´NA
ACT 2005 AND THE COURTS (SUPPLEMENTALPROVISIONS) ACT 1961 AND TO PROVIDE FORMATTERS CONNECTED THEREWITH.
[12th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act—
“Act of 1993” means the Interception of Postal Packets and Tele-
communications Messages (Regulation) Act 1993;
“arrestable offence” has the meaning it has in section 2 (as amended
by section 8 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006) of the Criminal LawAct 1997;
“authorisation” means an authorisation for the carrying out of sur-
veillance issued under section 5 or varied or renewed under section 6 ;
“document” includes—
(a) any book, record or other written or printed material in
any form, and
(b) any recording, including any data or information stored,
maintained or preserved electronically or otherwise thanin legible form;
“judge” means a judge of the District Court;“member of the Defence Forces” means a member of the Defence
Forces within the meaning of section 1 of the Defence (Amendment)Act 1990, other than a member of the Reserve Defence Force withinthe meaning of the Defence Act 1954;
“member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na” means a member of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na within the meaning of section 3 of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act
2005, other than a person referred to in paragraph ( b) of that
definition;
3Interpretation.S.1
4[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
“Minister” means the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform;
“place” includes—
(a) a dwelling or other building,
(b) a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled or not,
(c) a vessel, whether sea-going or not,
(d) an aircraft, whether capable of operation or not, and
(e) a hovercraft;
“relevant Minister” means—
(a) the Minister, in relation to approvals granted by a superior
officer of, and documents and information in the custodyof, the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
(b) the Minister for Defence, in relation to approvals granted
by a superior officer of, and documents and informationin the custody of, the Defence Forces, and
(c) the Minister for Finance, in relation to approvals granted
by a superior officer of, and documents and informationin the custody of, the Revenue Commissioners;
“revenue offence” means an offence under any of the following pro-
visions that is an arrestable offence:
(a) section 186 of the Customs Consolidation Act 1876;
(b) section 1078 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997;
(c) section 102 of the Finance Act 1999;
(d) section 119 of the Finance Act 2001;
(e) section 79 (inserted by section 62 of the Finance Act 2005)
of the Finance Act 2003;
(f) section 78 of the Finance Act 2005;
“superior officer” means—
(a) in the case of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, a member of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na not below the rank of superintendent;
(b) in the case of the Defence Forces, a member of the
Defence Forces not below the rank of colonel; and
(c) in the case of the Revenue Commissioners, an officer of
the Revenue Commissioners not below the rank of prin-cipal officer;
“surveillance” means—
(a) monitoring, observing, listening to or making a recording
of a particular person or group of persons or their move-ments, activities and communications, or[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(b) monitoring or making a recording of places or things,
by or with the assistance of surveillance devices;“surveillance device” means an apparatus designed or adapted for
use in surveillance, but does not include—
(a) an apparatus designed to enhance visual acuity or night
vision, to the extent to which it is not used to make arecording of any person who, or any place or thing that,is being monitored or observed,
(b) a CCTV within the meaning of section 38 of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na Act 2005, or
(c) a camera, to the extent to which it is used to take photo-
graphs of any person who, or any thing that, is in a placeto which the public have access;
“tracking device” means a surveillance device that is used only for
the purpose of providing information regarding the location of a per-son, vehicle or thing;
“written record of approval” means a written record of approval pre-
pared by a superior officer under section 7(6) or8(6).
2.—(1) This Act applies to surveillance carried out by members
of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, members of the Defence Forces and officers
of the Revenue Commissioners.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall render unlawful any activity that
would otherwise be lawful.
(3) An authorisation or approval under this Act may not be issued
or granted in respect of an activity that would constitute an intercep-tion within the meaning of the Act of 1993.
(4) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that this Act
does not apply to the following:
(a) the use of a closed circuit television system in a Garda
Sı´ocha´na station;
(b) the recording by electronic or other similar means under
section 27 of the Criminal Justice Act 1984 of the ques-tioning of a person by members of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
at Garda Sı ´ocha´na stations or elsewhere in connection
with the investigation of offences;
(c) the recording by electronic or other similar means of any
evidence given, or statement made, by a person for thepurposes of any court proceedings.
3.—A member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, a member of the Defence
Forces or an officer of the Revenue Commissioners shall carry outsurveillance only in accordance with a valid authorisation or anapproval granted in accordance with section 7 or8.
4.—(1) A superior officer of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na may apply to a
judge for an authorisation where he or she has reasonable groundsfor believing that—
5S.1
Application of Act.
Surveillance.
Application for
authorisation.S.4
Authorisation.
6[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(a) as part of an operation or investigation being conducted
by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na concerning an arrestable offence,
the surveillance being sought to be authorised is neces-sary for the purposes of obtaining information as towhether the offence has been committed or as to the cir-cumstances relating to the commission of the offence, orobtaining evidence for the purposes of proceedings inrelation to the offence,
(b) the surveillance being sought to be authorised is necessary
for the purpose of preventing the commission ofarrestable offences, or
(c) the surveillance being sought to be authorised is necessary
for the purpose of maintaining the security of the State.
(2) A superior officer of the Defence Forces may apply to a judge
for an authorisation where he or she has reasonable grounds forbelieving that the surveillance being sought to be authorised is neces-sary for the purpose of maintaining the security of the State.
(3) A superior officer of the Revenue Commissioners may apply
to a judge for an authorisation where he or she has reasonablegrounds for believing that—
(a) as part of an operation or investigation being conducted
by the Revenue Commissioners concerning a revenueoffence, the surveillance being sought to be authorised isnecessary for the purpose of obtaining information as towhether the offence has been committed or as to the cir-cumstances relating to the commission of the offence, orobtaining evidence for the purpose of proceedings inrelation to the offence, or
(b) the surveillance being sought to be authorised is necessary
for the purpose of preventing the commission ofrevenue offences.
(4) In a case in which surveillance carried out under section 7
is sought under subsection (10) of that section to be continued by
application under this section, the information on oath supportingthe application shall include a copy of the written record of approvalconcerned, a summary of the results of the surveillance carried outand the reasons why continued surveillance is required.
(5) A superior officer who makes an application under subsection
(1),(2),(3)or(4)shall also have reasonable grounds for believing
that the surveillance being sought to be authorised is—
(a) the least intrusive means available, having regard to its
objectives and other relevant considerations,
(b) proportionate to its objectives, having regard to all the cir-
cumstances including its likely impact on the rights of anyperson, and
(c) of a duration that is reasonably required to achieve its
objectives.
5.—(1) An application under section 4 for an authorisation and
under section 6 for a variation or renewal of an authorisation—[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(a) shall be made ex parte and shall be heard otherwise than
in public, and
(b) may be made to a judge assigned to any district court
district.
(2) Subject to subsection (4) , the judge shall issue such authoris-
ation as he or she considers reasonable, if satisfied by informationon oath of the superior officer concerned that—
(a) the requirements specified in subsection (1) ,(2)or(3),a s
the case may be, of section 4 are fulfilled, and
(b) to do so is justified, having regard to the matters referred
to in section 4(5) and all other relevant circumstances.
(3) An information on oath of a superior officer specifying the
grounds for his or her belief that the surveillance is necessary for thepurpose of preventing the commission of arrestable offences referredto in section 4(1)(b), or the commission of revenue offences referred
to in section 4(3)(b), need not specify a particular arrestable offence
or a particular revenue offence, as the case may be, in respect ofwhich the authorisation is being sought.
(4) The judge shall not issue an authorisation if he or she is satis-
fied that the surveillance being sought to be authorised is likely torelate primarily to communications protected by privilege.
(5) An authorisation may impose such conditions in respect of the
surveillance authorised as the judge considers appropriate.
(6) An authorisation shall be in writing and shall specify—
(a) particulars of the surveillance device that is authorised to
be used,
(b) the person who, or the place or thing that, is to be the
subject of the surveillance,
(c) the name of the superior officer to whom it is issued,
(d) the conditions (if any) subject to which the authorisation
is issued, and
(e) the date of expiry of the authorisation.
(7) An authorisation may authorise the superior officer named in
it, or any member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, any member of the
Defence Forces or any officer of the Revenue Commissioners desig-nated by that superior officer, accompanied by any other personwhom he or she considers necessary, to enter, if necessary by the useof reasonable force, any place for the purposes of initiating or carry-ing out the authorised surveillance, and withdrawing the authorisedsurveillance device, without the consent of a person who owns or isin charge of the place.
(8) An authorisation shall expire on the day fixed by the judge
that he or she considers reasonable in the circumstances and that isnot later than 3 months from the day on which it is issued.
(9) Subject to any conditions imposed by the judge under subsec-
tion (5) , an authorisation shall have effect both within the district
7S.5S.5
Variation or
renewal ofauthorisation.
Approval for
surveillance in casesof urgency.
8[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
court district to which the judge is assigned and in any other part of
the State.
6.—(1) A judge may, on application in that behalf by the superior
officer to whom an authorisation was issued, if satisfied by infor-mation on oath of that superior officer justifying the variation orrenewal of the authorisation—
(a) vary the authorisation, or
(b) renew the authorisation, on the same or different con-
ditions, for such further period, not exceeding 3 months,
as the judge considers appropriate.
(2) An application for a renewal under this section shall be made
before the authorisation concerned, or any previous renewal of thatauthorisation, as the case may be, has expired.
(3) Where an application for a renewal under this section has
been made and the authorisation concerned would, but for this sub-section, expire during the hearing of the application, it shall bedeemed not to expire until the determination of the application.
7.—(1) A member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, a member of the
Defence Forces or an officer of the Revenue Commissioners maycarry out surveillance without an authorisation if the surveillance hasbeen approved by a superior officer in accordance with this section.
(2) A member or officer referred to in subsection (1) may apply
to a superior officer for the grant of an approval to carry out surveil-lance if he or she believes on reasonable grounds that the require-ments of subsection (1) ,(2)or(3), as the case may be, of section 4
are fulfilled and that the surveillance is justified having regard to thematters referred to in section 4(5) , but that, before an authorisation
could be issued—
(a) it is likely that a person would abscond for the purpose of
avoiding justice, obstruct the course of justice or commitan arrestable offence or a revenue offence, as the casemay be,
(b) information or evidence in relation to the commission of
an arrestable offence or a revenue offence, as the casemay be, is likely to be destroyed, lost or otherwisebecome unavailable, or
(c) the security of the State would be likely to be
compromised.
(3) A superior officer to whom an application under subsection
(2)is made shall approve the carrying out of such surveillance as he
or she considers appropriate, having regard to the information in theapplication, if he or she is satisfied that there are reasonable groundsfor believing that an authorisation would be issued under section 5
but that one or more of the conditions of urgency specified in subsec-
tion (2) apply.
(4) An approval may be granted subject to conditions, including
as to the duration of the surveillance.[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(5) An approval under this section permits the member or officer
concerned, accompanied by any other person whom he or she con-siders necessary, to enter, if necessary by the use of reasonable force,any place for the purposes of initiating or carrying out the approvedsurveillance, and withdrawing the approved surveillance device,without the consent of a person who owns or is in charge of the place.
(6) A superior officer who approves the carrying out of surveil-
lance under this section shall, as soon as practicable and, in any case,not later than 8 hours after the surveillance has been approved, pre-pare a written record of approval of that surveillance.
(7) A written record of approval shall be in such form as the rel-
evant Minister may prescribe by regulations and shall include—
(a) particulars of the surveillance device that is approved to
be used,
(b) the person who, or the place or thing that, is to be the
subject of the surveillance,
(c) the name of the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, member
of the Defence Forces or officer of the Revenue Commis-sioners to whom the approval is granted,
(d) the conditions (if any) subject to which the approval is
granted,
(e) the time at which the approval is granted, and
(f) the duration of the approved surveillance.
(8) The member or officer shall not carry out surveillance under
this section for a period of more than 72 hours from the time atwhich the approval is granted.
(9) The superior officer who approved the carrying out of surveil-
lance may vary that approval, or any condition attached to it, at anytime before the expiry of the period of 72 hours.
(10) ( a) If the superior officer who approved the carrying out of
surveillance believes on reasonable grounds that surveil-lance beyond the period of 72 hours is warranted, he orshe shall, as soon as possible but in any case before theexpiry of that period, make an application under section
4(4) for an authorisation to continue the surveillance.
(b) Where an application under section 4(4) has been made
and the period referred to in paragraph (a) would, but
for this paragraph, expire during the hearing of the appli-cation, it shall be deemed not to expire until the determi-nation of the application.
(11) A superior officer who approves the carrying out of surveil-
lance under this section shall make a report as soon as possible and,in any case, not later than 7 days after the surveillance concernedhas been completed, specifying the grounds on which the approvalwas granted, and including a copy of the written record of approvaland a summary of the results of the surveillance.
9S.7S.7
Tracking devices.
10[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(12) A report under subsection (11) shall be made to—
(a) in the case of a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, a member
of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na of the rank of Assistant Com-
missioner,
(b) in the case of an officer of the Defence Forces, a general
officer within the meaning of section 2 (as amended bysection 2( b) of the Defence (Amendment) Act 1979) of
the Defence Act 1954, and
(c) in the case of an officer of the Revenue Commissioners,
an officer of the Revenue Commissioners of the rank ofAssistant Secretary.
8.—(1) Notwithstanding sections 4 to7, a member of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na, a member of the Defence Forces or an officer of the
Revenue Commissioners may, for a period of not more than 4months or such shorter period as the Minister may prescribe by regu-lations, monitor the movements of persons, vehicles or things usinga tracking device if that use has been approved by a superior officerin accordance with this section.
(2) A member or officer referred to in subsection (1) may apply
to a superior officer for the grant of an approval to use a trackingdevice if he or she believes on reasonable grounds that—
(a) the requirements of subsection (1) ,(2)or(3), as the case
may be, of section 4 are fulfilled and that surveillance
is justified having regard to the matters referred to inparagraphs (b) and (c)ofsection 4(5) , but that the use of
a tracking device would be sufficient for obtaining theinformation or evidence in the circumstances concerned,and
(b) the information or evidence sought could reasonably be
obtained by the use of a tracking device for a specifiedperiod that is as short as is practicable to allow the infor-mation or evidence to be obtained.
(3) A superior officer to whom an application under subsection
(2)is made shall approve such use of a tracking device as he or
she considers appropriate, having regard to the information in theapplication, if he or she is satisfied that there are reasonable groundsfor believing that an authorisation would be issued under section 5
and that the conditions specified in subsection (2) apply.
(4) An approval may be granted subject to conditions, including
as to the duration of the use of the tracking device.
(5) An approval under this section permits the member or officer
concerned, accompanied by any other person whom he or she con-siders necessary, to place the tracking device and remove it at theend of its use, without the consent of a person who owns or is incharge of the vehicle or thing on which it is placed.
(6) A superior officer who approves the use of a tracking device
under this section shall, as soon as practicable and, in any case, notlater than 8 hours after the use has been approved, prepare a writtenrecord of approval of the use of the tracking device.[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(7) A written record of approval shall be in such form as the rel-
evant Minister may prescribe by regulations and shall include—
(a) particulars of the tracking device that is approved to be
used,
(b) the person who, or the vehicle or thing that, is to be
monitored,
(c) the name of the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, member
of the Defence Forces or officer of the Revenue Commis-sioners to whom the approval is granted,
(d) the conditions (if any) subject to which the approval is
granted,
(e) the time at which the approval is granted, and
(f) the duration of the use approved.
(8) Without prejudice to the maximum period for which an
approval granted under this section may have effect, the superiorofficer who approves the use of a tracking device under this sectionmay vary that approval, or any condition attached to it, at any timebefore the expiry of that approval.
(9) A superior officer who approves the use of a tracking device
under this section shall make a report as soon as possible and, in anycase, not later than 7 days after its use has ended, specifying thegrounds on which the approval was granted, and including a copyof the written record of approval and a summary of the results ofthe monitoring.
(10) A report under subsection (9) shall be made to—
(a) in the case of a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, a member
of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na of the rank of Assistant Com-
missioner,
(b) in the case of an officer of the Defence Forces, a general
officer within the meaning of section 2 (as amended bysection 2( b) of the Defence (Amendment) Act 1979) of
the Defence Act 1954, and
(c) in the case of an officer of the Revenue Commissioners,
an officer of the Revenue Commissioners of the rank ofAssistant Secretary.
(11) The Minister may, in the interests of the protection of the
privacy and other rights of persons, the security of the State, andthe aims of preventing the commission of, and detecting, arrestableoffences, make regulations prescribing a period of less than 4 monthsas the maximum period for which approvals granted under thissection may have effect, and such regulations may prescribe differentperiods in respect of different purposes or circumstances.
9.—(1) An application for an authorisation under section 4 or6,
and any documents supporting the application, shall be retaineduntil—
(a) the day that is 3 years after the day on which the authoris-
ation concerned ceases to be in force, or
11S.8
Retention of
materials relating toapplications andreports.S.9
Restriction of
disclosure ofexistence ofauthorisations andother documents.
12[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(b) the day on which they are no longer required for any pros-
ecution or appeal to which they are relevant,
whichever is later.
(2) A written record of approval prepared under section 7(6) or
8(6), and a report made under section 7(11) or8(9), shall be
retained until—
(a) the day that is 3 years after the day on which the written
record of approval is prepared or the report concerned ismade, or
(b) the day on which they are no longer required for any pros-
ecution or appeal to which they are relevant,
whichever is later.
(3) The documents obtained as a result of surveillance carried out
or tracking devices used under this Act, other than those referred toinsubsections (1) and (2),shall be retained until—
(a) the day that is 3 years after the end of the surveillance or
monitoring concerned, or
(b) the day on which they are no longer required for any pros-
ecution or appeal to which they are relevant,
whichever is later.
(4) Subject to subsection (5) , the documents referred to in subsec-
tions (1) to(3)shall be destroyed as soon as practicable after they
are no longer required to be retained under those subsections.
(5) The relevant Minister may authorise in writing the retention
of any of the documents referred to in this section where he or sheconsiders it necessary to do so having regard to—
(a) the interests of the protection of the privacy and other
rights of persons,
(b) the security of the State,
(c) the aims of preventing the commission of, and detecting,
arrestable offences, and
(d) the interests of justice.
10.—(1) The relevant Minister shall ensure that information and
documents to which this Act applies are stored securely and thatonly persons who he or she authorises for that purpose have accessto them.
(2) In the interests of the protection of the privacy and other
rights of persons, the security of the State, and the aims of preventingthe commission of, and detecting, arrestable offences, the relevantMinister may make regulations prescribing—
(a) the persons or categories of persons who are to have
access for the purposes of this section to information withrespect to the existence of authorisations, approvals[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
granted under sections 7 and 8and documents referred
to in section 9 ,
(b) the procedures and arrangements for the secure storage,
and the maintenance of the security, of that informationand those documents, and
(c) the number of copies that may be made of those docu-
ments and the destruction of those copies as soon as pos-sible after they are no longer required under section 9.
(3) Notwithstanding section 13 , the Minister may make regu-
lations respecting the disclosure or non-disclosure, to the person whowas its subject or other persons whose interests are materiallyaffected by it, of the existence of an authorisation or an approvalunder section 7 or8, provided that any disclosure authorised by such
regulations is—
(a) consistent with the purposes for which the authorisation
or approval concerned was issued or granted,
(b) consistent with the security of the State, the protection of
persons’ privacy and other rights and the aims ofpreventing and detecting the commission of arrestableoffences, and
(c) unlikely to hinder the investigation in the future of such
offences.
(4) Any regulation made under subsection (3) may—
(a) require consultation by the Minister, in any particular case
of disclosure, with such classes of persons as may beprescribed,
(b) prescribe categories of persons (other than the subjects of
the authorisations or approvals) whose interests arematerially affected by authorisations or approvals, towhom disclosure is to be made, and
(c) permit the imposition of terms and conditions limiting the
extent or detail of disclosure as necessary, having regardto the matters referred to in subsection (3).
11.—(1) A person who believes that he or she might be the sub-
ject of an authorisation or an approval under section 7 or8may apply
to the Referee for an investigation into the matter.
(2) A superior officer who makes a report under section 7(11) or
8(9), or receives a report under section 7(12) or8(10) , may apply to
the Referee for an investigation into a matter if he or she believesthat such an investigation would be in the interests of justice.
(3) If an application is made under this section (other than one
that the Referee considers to be frivolous or vexatious), the Refereeshall investigate—
(a) whether an authorisation was issued or an approval was
granted as alleged in the application, and
(b) if so, whether there has been a relevant contravention.
13S.10
Complaints
procedure.S.11
14[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(4) If, after investigating the matter, the Referee concludes that
there has been a relevant contravention, the Referee shall—
(a) notify the applicant, and any other person whose interests
are materially affected by the relevant contravention, inwriting of that conclusion, and
(b) make a report of his or her findings to the Taoiseach.
(5) In the circumstances referred to in subsection (4) , the Referee
may also, if he or she is of opinion that the relevant contraventionwas material and that to do so would be justified in the circum-stances, by order do one or more of the following things:
(a) direct—
(i) the quashing of the authorisation or the reversal of
the approval, and
(ii) the destruction of the written record of approval con-
cerned, the report under section 7(11) or8(9) con-
cerned, and any information or documents obtainedas a result of the authorisation or approval;
(b) make a recommendation for the payment of such sum, not
exceeding \5,000, specified in the order by way of com-
pensation to the person who was the subject of the auth-orisation or approval;
(c) report the matter and any recommendation under para-
graph (b) to—
(i) the Garda Sı ´ocha´na Ombudsman Commission, in the
case of a contravention by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
(ii) the Minister for Defence, in the case of a contra-
vention by the Defence Forces,
(iii) the Minister for Finance, in the case of a contra-
vention by the Revenue Commissioners;
(d) report the matter and any recommendation under para-
graph (b) to the judge designated under section 12 .
(6) If the Referee is of opinion that, in all the circumstances, it
would not be in the public interest to—
(a) notify, under subsection (4)(a) , the applicant or the other
person, if any, of a conclusion that there has been a rel-evant contravention,
(b) direct the quashing, reversal or destruction under subsec-
tion (5)(a) ,o r
(c) make a recommendation for the payment of a sum by way
of compensation under subsection (5)(b) ,
he or she shall decline to do so.
(7) If, after investigating the matter, the Referee concludes that
there has not been a relevant contravention, the Referee shall givenotice in writing to the applicant stating only that there has been nosuch contravention.[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(8) A decision of the Referee under this section is final.
(9) A relevant contravention that is not material does not of itself
constitute a cause of action at the suit of a person who was the sub-ject of the authorisation or approval concerned.
(10) A person in charge of a Garda Sı ´ocha´na station within the
meaning of section 99(10) of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act 2005, a place
under the control of the Defence Forces or the Revenue Commis-sioners or any other place in which documents relevant to an investi-gation under this section are kept shall ensure that the Referee hasaccess to those places, and to the authorisations, written records ofapproval, reports and other relevant documents that the Refereemay request.
(11) The Referee—
(a) may, on his or her own initiative, and
(b) shall, where a case has been referred to him or her by the
designated judge under section 12(8) ,
investigate whether there has been a relevant contravention and this
section (other than subsection (7) ) shall apply to such an investi-
gation as if the references to “the applicant” in subsections (4) and
(6)were to “the person who was the subject of the authorisation
or approval”.
(12) In this section—
“Referee” means the holder of the office of Complaints Referee
under the Act of 1993;
“relevant contravention” means a contravention of a provision of
sections 4 to8.
12.—(1) After consulting with the Minister, the President of the
High Court shall invite a judge of the High Court to undertake (whileserving as such a judge) the duties specified in this section and, if theinvitation is accepted, the Government shall designate the judge forthe purposes of performing those functions.
(2) The designated judge holds office in accordance with the
terms of the designation.
(3) The functions of the designated judge are to—
(a) keep under review the operation of sections 4 to8,and
(b) report to the Taoiseach from time to time and at least once
every 12 months concerning any matters relating to theoperation of those sections that the designated judge con-siders should be reported.
(4) For the purpose of performing his or her functions the desig-
nated judge may investigate any case in which an authorisation isissued under section 5 or renewed or varied under section 6 or an
approval is granted under section 7 or8.
(5) A person in charge of a Garda Sı ´ocha´na station within the
meaning of section 99(10) of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act 2005, a place
15S.11
Review of
operation of thisAct by designatedjudge.S.12
Confidentiality of
information.
16[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
under the control of the Defence Forces or the Revenue Commis-
sioners or any other place in which documents relevant to the per-formance of the functions of the designated judge are kept shallensure that the designated judge has access to those places, and tothe authorisations, written records of approval, reports and otherrelevant documents that the designated judge may request.
(6) The Taoiseach shall ensure that a copy of a report under sub-
section (3)(b) is laid before each House of the Oireachtas not later
than 6 months after it is made, together with a statement of whetherany matter has been excluded under subsection (7) .
(7) If the Taoiseach considers, after consultation with the desig-
nated judge, that the publication of any matter in a report, copies ofwhich are to be laid before the Houses under subsection (6) , would
be prejudicial to the security of the State, the Taoiseach may excludethat matter from those copies.
(8) Where the designated judge investigates a case under subsec-
tion (4) and is of the opinion that it is in the interests of justice to
do so, he or she may refer that case to the Referee for an investi-gation under section 11(11) .
13.—(1) A person shall not disclose, inside or outside the State,
any information in connection with the operation of this Act inrelation to surveillance carried out under an authorisation or underan approval granted in accordance with section 7 or8, including any
information or documents obtained as a result of such surveillance,or reveal the existence of an application for the issue of an authoris-ation, the variation or renewal of an authorisation under section 6 or
the grant of an approval under section 7 or8, unless the disclosure
is to an authorised person and is—
(a) for the purposes of the prevention, investigation or detec-
tion of crime,
(b) for the prosecution of offences,
(c) in the interests of the security of the State, or
(d) required under any other enactment.
(2) A relevant person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \3,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months orboth, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\50,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years
or both.
(3) A person other than a relevant person who contravenes sub-
section (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months orboth, or[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding
\10,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years
or both.
(4) In this section—
“authorised person” means—
(a) a person referred to in section 62(4)( a) of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na Act 2005,
(b) the Minister for Defence,
(c) the Minister for Finance, and
(d) a person the disclosure to whom is—
(i) authorised by the Commissioner of the Garda Sı ´och-
a´na, the Chief of Staff of the Defence Forces or a
Revenue Commissioner, or
(ii) otherwise authorised by law;
“relevant person” means a person who is or was—
(a) a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, a member of the
Defence Forces or an officer of the Revenue Com-missioners,
(b) a reserve member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na within the mean-
ing of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act 2005,
(c) a member of the Reserve Defence Force within the mean-
ing of the Defence Act 1954,
(d) a member of the civilian staff of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na or of
the Defence Forces, or
(e) engaged under a contract or other arrangement to work
with or for the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, the Defence Forces or
the Revenue Commissioners.
14.—(1) Evidence obtained as a result of surveillance carried out
under an authorisation or under an approval granted in accordancewith section 7 or8may be admitted as evidence in criminal pro-
ceedings.
(2) Nothing in this Act is to be construed as prejudicing the
admissibility of information or material obtained otherwise than asa result of surveillance carried out under an authorisation or underan approval granted in accordance with section 7 or8.
(3) ( a) Information or documents obtained as a result of surveil-
lance carried out under an authorisation or under anapproval granted in accordance with section 7 or8may
be admitted as evidence in criminal proceedings notwith-standing any error or omission on the face of the author-isation or written record of approval concerned, if thecourt, having regard in particular to the matters specifiedinparagraph (b) , decides that—
(i) the error or omission concerned was inadvertent, and
17S.13
Admissibility of
evidence.S.14
18[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(ii) the information or document ought to be admitted in
the interests of justice.
(b) The matters referred to in paragraph (a) are the following:
(i) whether the error or omission concerned was serious
or merely technical in nature;
(ii) the nature of any right infringed by the obtaining of
the information or document concerned;
(iii) whether there were circumstances of urgency;
(iv) the possible prejudicial effect of the information or
document concerned;
(v) the probative value of the information or document
concerned.
(4) ( a) Information or documents obtained as a result of surveil-
lance carried out under an authorisation or under anapproval granted in accordance with section 7 or8may
be admitted as evidence in criminal proceedings notwith-standing any failure by any member of the Garda Sı ´och-
a´na, member of the Defence Forces or officer of the
Revenue Commissioners concerned to comply with arequirement of the authorisation or approval concerned,if the court, having regard in particular to the mattersspecified in paragraph (b) , decides that—
(i) the member or officer concerned acted in good faith
and that the failure was inadvertent, and
(ii) the information or document ought to be admitted in
the interests of justice.
(b) The matters referred to in paragraph (a) are the following:
(i) whether the failure concerned was serious or merely
technical in nature;
(ii) the nature of any right infringed by the obtaining of
the information or document concerned;
(iii) whether there were circumstances of urgency;
(iv) the possible prejudicial effect of the information or
document concerned;
(v) the probative value of the information or document
concerned.
(5) It shall be presumed, until the contrary is shown, that a sur-
veillance device or tracking device used by a member of the GardaSı´ocha´na, a member of the Defence Forces or an officer of the
Revenue Commissioners for the purposes referred to in this Act is adevice capable of producing accurate information or material with-out the necessity of proving that the surveillance device or trackingdevice was in good working order.[2009.] [ No. 19.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
15.—(1) Unless authorised by the court, the existence or non-
existence of the following shall not be disclosed by way of discoveryor otherwise in the course of any proceedings:
(a) an application under section 4 or6;
(b) an authorisation;
(c) an approval granted under section 7 or8;
(d) surveillance carried out under an authorisation or under
an approval granted under section 7 ;
(e) the use of a tracking device under section 8 ; and
(f) documentary or other information or evidence in relation
to—
(i) the decision to apply for an authorisation or an
approval under section 7 or8,o r
(ii) anything referred to in paragraphs (a) to(e).
(2) The court shall not authorise the disclosure if it is satisfied
that to do so is likely to create a material risk to—
(a) the security of the State,
(b) the ability of the State to protect persons from terrorist
activity, terrorist-linked activity, organised crime andother serious crime,
(c) the maintenance of the integrity, effectiveness and security
of the operations of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, the Defence
Forces or the Revenue Commissioners, or
(d) the ability of the State to protect witnesses, including
their identities.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) , the court may authorise the
disclosure, subject to such conditions as it considers justified, if in allof the circumstances it is in the interests of justice to do so.
(4) In this section—
“organised crime” has the meaning it has in Part 7 of the Criminal
Justice Act 2006;
“terrorist activity” and “terrorist-linked activity” have the meanings
they have in section 4 of, and Schedule 2 to, the Criminal Justice(Terrorist Offences) Act 2005.
16.—(1) The Minister, the Minister for Defence and the Minister
for Finance may make regulations prescribing any matter or thingwhich is referred to in this Act as prescribed or to be prescribed byhim or her.
(2) Regulations made under this section may contain such inci-
dental, supplementary and consequential provisions as appear to theMinister of the Government making them to be necessary or expedi-ent for the purposes of the regulations.
19Disclosure of
information.
Regulations.S.16
Amendment of
Garda Sı ´ocha´na Act
2005.
Amendment of
Courts(SupplementalProvisions) Act1961.
Short title.
20[No. 19.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act
2009 .
(3) Every regulation under this section shall be laid before each
House of the Oireachtas as soon as may be after it has been madeand, if a resolution annulling the regulation is passed by either suchHouse within the next 21 days on which that House has sat after theregulation is laid before it, the regulation shall be annulled accord-ingly, but without prejudice to the validity of anything previouslydone thereunder.
17.—The definition of “enactment” in section 98(5) of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na Act 2005 is amended by—
(a) deleting “and” at the end of paragraph ( a),
(b) in paragraph ( b), substituting “Postal and Telecommunica-
tions Services Act 1983, and” for “Postal and Telecom-munications Services Act 1983;”, and
(c) inserting the following after paragraph ( b):
“(c) any provision of the Criminal Justice
(Surveillance) Act 2009 ;”.
18.—Section 32A(1) (inserted by section 180 of the Criminal
Justice Act 2006) of the Courts (Supplemental Provisions) Act 1961is amended—
(a) in paragraph ( c), by substituting “such assets or proceeds;”
for “such assets or proceeds.”, and
(b) by inserting the following after paragraph ( c):
“(d) the power to issue, vary or renew an authoris-
ation under section 5 or6of the Criminal
Justice (Surveillance) Act 2009 .”.
19.—This Act may be cited as the Criminal Justice (Surveillance)
Act 2009.