————————
Number 17of2007
————————
FOYLE AND CARLINGFORD FISHERIES ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title.
2. Commencement.3. Interpretation.
PART 2
Aquaculture
4. Aquaculture.
PART 3
Amendments to the Principal Act
5. Definitions.6. Functions of Commission.
7. Regulation of fishing.
8. Restrictions on number of licences.9. Acquisition and development of waters for angling.
10. Permits to fish in Commission’s waters.11. Close seasons and times.12. Unlicensed fishing, etc.13. Metrication.14. Use of nets across rivers.15. Penalty for Pollution.16. Use of certain devices to take fish.2[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
17. Fishing by cross lines.
18. Taking fish unlawfully killed or found dead.19. Taking, etc. spawn, smolts or fry of salmon or trout.20. Officers of the Commission.21. River watchers.22. Seizure and disposal of certain articles.23. Powers of authorised persons.24. Warrants to enter certain premises.25. Apprehension of offenders.26. Powers of inspection, examination and detention.27. Penalties for offences.28. Exemption for Acts done for improvement of fisheries, etc.29. Forfeiture of boats, equipment etc.30. Judicial Review.31. Calculation of time periods.32. Enforcement of private fishing rights.33. Miscellaneous amendments to Act of 1952.
PART 4
Miscellaneous Amendments
34. Amendment of Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997.35. Amendment of Foreshore Act 1933.
SCHEDULE 1
Provisions to be inserted as Schedule 3A and Schedule 3Bt o
the Act of 1952
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments Relating to Penalties
————————[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
Acts Referred to
Arbitration Acts 1954 to 1998
Bankruptcy Act 1988 1988, No. 27British-Irish Agreement Act 1999 1999, No. 1Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997 1997, No. 23Fisheries Act 1980 1980, No. 1Foreshore Act 1933 1933, No. 33Foyle Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1983 1983, No. 2Foyle Fisheries Act 1952 1952, No. 5
34————————
Number 17of2007
————————
FOYLE AND CARLINGFORD FISHERIES ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE
FOYLE FISHERIES ACT 1952 AND FOR RELATED
MATTERS.
[10th April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—This Act may be cited as the Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries
Act 2007.
2.—This Act shall come into operation on such day or days as the
Minister may by order or orders appoint either generally or withreference to any particular purpose or provision and different daysmay be so appointed for different purposes or different provisionsand in particular the Minister may in any such order under thissection specify or delimit a geographical area as respects which thisAct or any provision of the Act is to come into operation.
3.—In this Act—
“Act of 1952” means the Foyle Fisheries Act 1952;“Act of 1983” means the Foyle Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1983;
“Minister” means the Minister for Communications, Marine and
Natural Resources.
PART 2
Aquaculture
4.—(1) The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion of the follow-
ing Part after Part VI—
5Short title.
Commencement.
Interpretation.
Aquaculture.Pt.2S . 4
6[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
“PART VIA
Aquaculture
Aquaculture licences
Aquaculture
licences.53A.—(1) The Commission may, in accordance
with the provisions of this Part, grant a licence (‘anaquaculture licence’) to any person authorising theperson to engage in aquaculture within any areaspecified in the licence (the ‘licensed area’).
(2) An aquaculture licence may be granted not-
withstanding any public right to fish in the areawhich, on the granting of the licence, becomes thelicensed area.
(3) Subject to subsection (4) the licensed area
may include any part of the foreshore or any partof the bed of the sea or an estuary.
(4) An aquaculture licence shall not specify
any area—
(a) which forms either part of the foreshore
or part of the bed of the sea or an estu-ary owned or lawfully occupied by anyperson, unless the licence is granted to,or with the consent in writing of, theowner or lawful occupier of that partof the foreshore or that part of the bedof the sea or the estuary, or
(b) which is within the limits of a several
fishery, unless the licence is granted to,or with the consent in writing of, theowner or lawful occupier of thatfishery.
(5) A person shall not engage in aquaculture
in the Foyle Area or the Carlingford Area exceptunder, and in accordance with the conditions of,an aquaculture licence.
(6) A person who contravenes subsection (5)
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months, orto both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \100,000 or to imprison-[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
ment for a term not exceeding 2 years,
or to both.
Applications
foraquaculturelicences.53B.—(1) An application for an aquaculture
licence shall be made to the Commission andshall—
(a) contain such information and be made
in such form and in such manner asmay be prescribed,
(b) be advertised, at the expense of the
applicant, in such form and in suchmanner as may be prescribed, and
(c) be accompanied by—
(i) any consent required by section
53A(4), and
(ii) the prescribed fee.
(2) Without prejudice to any other provision of
this Part, regulations under subsection (1)( a) may
contain provisions similar to the provisions ofDirective 85/337/EEC
1and may, in particular,
require the Commission, when consideringwhether to grant an aquaculture licence, to take
account of any information received by, or rep-resentations made to, the Commission whichrelate to the impact of aquaculture on theenvironment.
(3) The Commission may, by giving notice to
the applicant, require him to furnish such furtherinformation as may be specified in the notice,within the period so specified, as the Commissionmay require for the purpose of determining theapplication.
(4) If a person fails to furnish any
information—
(a) required under subsection (1)( a), or
(b) specified in a notice under subsection
(3) within the period specified in thenotice,
the Commission may refuse to proceed with the
application.
Determination
of applicationsforaquaculturelicences.53C.—(1) The Commission shall consider an
application for an aquaculture licence and either—
(a) grant the licence, or
(b) refuse to grant the licence.
1OJ No. L175, 05.07.1985, p.40
7Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
8[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(2) In determining any application for an aqua-
culture licence, the Commission shall consider anywritten representations relating to the application(including any representations made to the Com-mission which relate to the impact of aquacultureon the environment) which are received by theCommission within the period of 28 days begin-ning with the date on which the application waslast advertised in accordance with section53B(1)( b).
(3) As soon as practicable after determining an
application for an aquaculture licence the Com-mission shall give—
(a) the applicant, and
(b) each person who made representations
considered under subsection (2),
notice of the determination.
(4) Where the Commission grants an aquacul-
ture licence, the Commission shall, in such formand in such manner as may be prescribed, publisha notice stating that the licence has been granted.
(5) Where the Commission grants an aquacul-
ture licence, the licence—
(a) shall, if no appeal is brought under
section 53P, take effect on the expir-ation of 28 days from the date onwhich the Commission, in accordancewith subsection (4), last published anotice stating that the application hasbeen granted,
(b) shall, if an appeal is brought under
section 53P, take effect—
(i) if and so far as the licence is con-
firmed on appeal, from the dateon which the appeal is deter-mined,
(ii) if the appeal is withdrawn, on the
date of the withdrawal of theappeal.
Form and
conditions ofaquaculturelicences.53D.—(1) An aquaculture licence shall define
the position and limits of the licensed area by ref-erence to a map or chart, either with or withoutdescriptive matter (which, in the case of any dis-crepancy with the map or chart, shall prevailexcept in so far as may otherwise be provided bythe licence).
(2) Where any consent mentioned in section
53A(4) was given subject to any conditions or limi-tations, the licence shall be subject to such con-ditions or limitations and such fact shall be statedin the licence.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(3) An aquaculture licence may contain such
other conditions as the Commission shalldetermine.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-
section (3), conditions contained in an aquaculturelicence may relate to any of the following:
(a) operational practices;
(b) monitoring and protection of the health
of fish, aquatic invertebrate animals oraquatic plants and the reporting ofincidences of disease and the presenceof parasites;
(c) monitoring and inspection of the activi-
ties carried on pursuant to the licence;
(d) the type of ropes, trestles, fish cages or
other equipment or structures whichmay be located within the licensedarea;
(e) the marking, by buoys or otherwise, of
the limits of the licensed area or anypart of it, or the location of ropes,trestles, fish cages or any structureswithin the licensed area;
(f) the keeping of records by the holder of
the licence;
(g) the making of returns and the giving of
other information to the Commissionin relation to activities in the licensed
area;
(h) the protection of the environment
(including the man-made environmentof heritage value) and the control ofdischarges from the licensed area;
(i) appropriate environmental, water qual-
ity and biological monitoring and, inparticular, the provision of samples orof facilities for taking samples, in thelicensed area;
(j) in relation to the farming and culture
of fish—
(i) the amount of feed inputs,
(ii) annual or seasonal limits on stock
inputs and outputs and theamount of stock in the licensedarea or any part of it,
(iii) the disposal of dead fish,
9Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
10[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(iv) measures for preventing the escape
of fish and arrangements forreporting any such escape,
(v) the movement of fish within, and in
to or out of, the licensed area;
(k) the payment of any prescribed fee in
relation to the licence.
(5) An aquaculture licence may, in so far as it
is expedient for the purpose of giving effect to anyconditions attached to it, exempt—
(a) the holder of the aquaculture licence
and any person acting under his direc-tions, and
(b) a person who acquires fish of any kind
taken in accordance with suchconditions,
from the restrictions imposed by section 35 or
regulations made under section 13( gg) in so far as
those restrictions apply to fish of that kind.
Duration of
aquaculturelicences.53E.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), an
aquaculture licence—
(a) shall in the first instance be limited to a
period specified by the Commission inwriting, being a period of not less than10 years and not exceeding 20 years,and
(b) on the expiration of that period shall,
on the Commission being satisfied thatreasonable progress has been, and islikely to continue to be, made indeveloping the licensed site, berenewed for a further period specifiedby the Commission in writing, notexceeding 20 years, and
(c) on the expiration of that period, on the
Commission’s being satisfied as afore-said, may be further renewed fromtime to time for such period specifiedby the Commission in writing but not,on any occasion, for a periodexceeding 20 years.
(2) Where an aquaculture licence has been
granted—
(a) to the occupier (not being the owner) of
a several fishery or of any landincluded in the licensed area, or
(b) to any person with the consent of such
an occupier,[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
and the owner of the several fishery or land did
not consent in writing to the grant of the licence,the licence shall remain in force only during thecontinuance in occupation of that occupier.
(3) Where an aquaculture licence is granted
with the consent in writing of any owner or occu-pier and a period is specified in the consent, thelicence shall remain in force only for that period.
Effect of
aquaculturelicence.53F.—(1) An aquaculture licence shall confer
on the holder of the licence the exclusive right, inthe licensed area, to deposit, introduce, propagate,dredge, harvest and take any fish, aquatic invert-ebrate animal or aquatic plant which is farmed orcultivated in accordance with the licence.
(2) An aquaculture licence shall not—
(a) except for the purpose of the farming or
cultivation of fish, animals or plants ofa kind specified in the licence, affectany right in or over the foreshore orthe bed of the sea or any estuary, orany right of several fishery,
(b) for any purpose, affect any such right of
any person which he enjoys under alocal or personal Act or under Charter,letters patent, prescription or immem-orial usage, without the consent ofthat person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act or any regulations made under this Act, theholder of an aquaculture licence and any personacting under his directions may, subject to the con-ditions contained in the licence, do anything auth-orised by the licence or anything that is necessaryor expedient for doing anything authorised bythe licence.
(4) The ownership of any fish, aquatic invert-
ebrate animal or aquatic plant the farming or culti-vation of which is authorised by an aquaculturelicence and which is farmed or cultivated inaccordance with that licence vests in the holder ofthe licence and his executors, administrators orassigns.
(5) Subject to section 53K, an aquaculture
licence is not transferable by the holder, but theCommission may transfer it to another person inaccordance with section 53L.
(6) Except as permitted by or under this Act, if
a person, by trespass, fishing or otherwise, inter-feres with anything done or being done pursuantto an aquaculture licence and the interference iscarried on without the permission of the holder ofthe licence, then, notwithstanding the existence of
11Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
12[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
any public right to fish, the person so interfering
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months, orto both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \25,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 2 years,or to both.
Variation of
aquaculturelicences byCommission.53G.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Com-
mission may, on its own initiative, vary an aquacul-ture licence (but not so as to extend the licensedarea) if it considers that it is in the public interestto do so.
(2) An aquaculture licence shall not be varied
so as to affect any conditions or limitations subjectto which a consent under section 53A(4) wasgiven, or any period mentioned in such a consent,otherwise than with the consent in writing of theperson or authority who gave the consent or his orits successor in title.
(3) Where the Commission proposes to vary an
aquaculture licence under this section, the Com-
mission shall—
(a) give to the holder of the licence at least
28 days notice of its proposal to do soand of the grounds upon which thevariation is proposed to be made, and
(b) advertise, in such form and in such man-
ner as may be prescribed, notice of itsproposal to vary the licence.
(4) Before varying the licence the Commission
shall consider any written representations whichare received by the Commission within the periodof 28 days from—
(a) the date on which the Commission gave
notice to the holder of the licence ofthe proposed variation, or
(b) the date on which the notice of the pro-
posal to vary the licence was lastadvertised in accordance with subsec-tion (3)( b),
whichever is the later.
(5) Where the Commission varies a licence
under this section the Commission shall serve anotice of the variation on the holder of the licenceand the notice shall specify—[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(a) the variation of the licence which the
Commission has decided to make, and
(b) the date or dates on which the variation
is to take effect.
(6) Where the Commission varies a licence
under this section, the Commission shall, in suchform and in such manner as may be prescribed,publish a notice stating that the licence has beenvaried.
(7) The Commission shall be liable to pay com-
pensation to the holder of an aquaculture licencein respect of any loss or damage sustained by himas a result of any action taken by the Commissionin relation to an aquaculture licence by virtue ofsubsection (1) and any dispute as to a person’sentitlement to such compensation or as to theamount of it shall be referred to and determinedby the Appeals Board.
Variation of
aquaculturelicences;applications byholder oflicence.53H.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), the holder
of an aquaculture licence may, at any time afterthe expiration of 2 years from the granting of thelicence, apply to the Commission, in such manneras may be prescribed, for the variation of thelicence specified in the application.
(2) An aquaculture licence shall not be varied
so as to affect any conditions or limitations subjectto which a consent under section 53A(4) wasgiven, or any period mentioned in such a consent,otherwise than with the consent in writing of theperson or authority who gave the consent or his orits successor in title.
(3) Where an application is made under subsec-
tion (1) for the variation of a licence (otherwisethan solely by reducing the licensed area) sections53A(3) and (4), 53B and 53C shall apply as theyapply to the grant, or an application for the grant,of an aquaculture licence.
Revocation of
aquaculturelicences.53I.—(1) The Commission may revoke an
aquaculture licence if it is satisfied that the holderof the licence has not engaged in aquaculture inthe licensed area for a continuous period of 2years.
(2) The Commission may revoke an aquacul-
ture licence if—
(a) it is satisfied that there has been a
breach of a condition specified in thelicence, or
(b) it considers that it is in the public
interest to do so.
(3) Where the Commission proposes to revoke
an aquaculture licence, the Commission shall give
13Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
14[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
the holder of the licence at least 28 days notice
of—
(a) its intention to do so, and
(b) the grounds upon which the revocation
is proposed to be made,
and before revoking the licence the Commission
shall consider any representations made by theholder of the licence before the expiration of thenotice.
(4) Where the Commission revokes an aquacul-
ture licence the Commission shall give notice ofthe revocation to the person whose licence hasbeen revoked, and the notice shall inform that per-son of his right of appeal under section 53P, andof the time within which the appeal may bebrought.
(5) The revocation of an aquaculture licence in
accordance with this section shall not take effectuntil—
(a) the expiry of the time allowed for mak-
ing an appeal under section 53P, or
(b) if an appeal is made under section
53P—
(i) if in so far as the revocation of the
licence is confirmed on appeal, thedate on which the appeal is deter-mined, or
(ii) if the appeal is withdrawn, on the
date of the withdrawal of theappeal,
whichever is the later.
(6) The Commission shall be liable to pay com-
pensation to a person who was the holder of anaquaculture licence in respect of any loss ordamage sustained by that person as a result of anyaction taken by the Commission by virtue of sub-section (2)( b) and any dispute as to a person’s
entitlement to such compensation or as to theamount of it shall be referred to and determinedby the Appeals Board.
Surrender of
aquaculturelicences.53J.—(1) An aquaculture licence may, in
accordance with subsections (2) to (5), be surren-dered by its holder to the Commission if the Com-mission accepts the surrender.
(2) The holder of an aquaculture licence who
wishes to surrender it shall make an applicationfor that purpose to the Commission on a form pro-vided by the Commission for the purpose, giving[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
such information and accompanied by such docu-
mentation as the Commission reasonably requiresand accompanied by the fee payable in accordancewith section 53N.
(3) On receiving an application for the surren-
der of an aquaculture licence the Commission—
(a) shall inspect the licensed area, and
(b) may require the holder of the aquacul-
ture licence to—
(i) provide the Commission with
further information,
(ii) carry out such works to the licensed
area as the Commission may spec-ify in writing.
(4) Where the surrender of a licence is
accepted by the Commission under this section theCommission shall issue a certificate (a ‘certificateof completion’) to the applicant and, on the issueof that certificate, the aquaculture licence shallcease to have effect.
(5) If within the period of 3 months from the
date on which the Commission receives an appli-cation to surrender a licence, or within such longerperiod as the Commission and the applicant mayat any time agree in writing, the Commission hasneither issued a certificate of completion nor givennotice to the applicant that the Commission hasrefused the application, the Commission shall bedeemed to have refused the application.
Vesting of
aquaculturelicences ondeath orbankruptcy ofholder.53K.—(1) On the death of the holder of an
aquaculture licence, the licence shall be regardedas property forming part of the deceased’s per-sonal estate, whether or not it would be soregarded apart from this subsection, and shallaccordingly vest in his personal representative.
(2) If the holder of an aquaculture licence is
adjudicated bankrupt, the licence shall beregarded for the purposes of the Bankruptcy Act1988 as property forming part of the bankrupt’sestate, whether or not it would be so regardedapart from this subsection, and shall accordinglyvest as such in the Official Assignee.
(3) A person in whom an aquaculture licence
vests under this section shall become the holder ofthe aquaculture licence, in place of the priorholder, from the date of the vesting.
(4) Where an aquaculture licence vests in any
person under this section, that person shall givenotice of that fact to the Commission not laterthan the end of the period of 90 days, or suchlonger period as may be agreed with the
15Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
16[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
Commission, beginning with the date of the
vesting.
Transfer, etc.
of aquaculturelicences.53L.—(1) An aquaculture licence may be trans-
ferred to another person in accordance with thefollowing provisions of this section.
(2) Where the holder of an aquaculture licence
desires that the licence be transferred to anotherperson (‘the proposed transferee’) the aquaculturelicence holder and the proposed transferee shalljointly make an application to the Commission fora transfer of the licence.
(3) An application under subsection (2) for the
transfer of an aquaculture licence shall be madeon a form provided by the Commission for thepurpose, accompanied by—
(a) such information as the Commission
may reasonably require,
(b) where the aquaculture licence has been
granted subject to the consent of theowner or lawful occupier of the fore-shore, bed of the sea, estuary or anyfishery, the consent in writing of thatowner or lawful occupier, as the casemay be, to the proposed transfer ofthe licence,
(c) the fee payable pursuant to section
53N, and
(d) the licence.
(4) If the Commission is not satisfied that the
licence should be transferred to the proposedtransferee, it shall give notice of its refusal totransfer the licence to the holder of the aquacul-ture licence and the proposed transferee.
(5) If, on an application under subsection (2),
the Commission is satisfied that the licence shouldbe transferred to the proposed transferee, theCommission shall effect a transfer of the aquacul-ture licence to the proposed transferee.
(6) The Commission shall effect a transfer of
an aquaculture licence under subsection (5) bycausing the licence to be endorsed with the nameand other particulars of the proposed transferee asthe holder of the licence from such date specifiedin the endorsement as may be agreed with theapplicants.
(7) Nothing in this section shall affect the liab-
ility of the holder of an aquaculture licence for anyfailure by him, before any transfer under subsec-tion (5) took effect, to comply with any conditionof that licence.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
Register of
licences.53M.—(1) The Commission shall, in such man-
ner as may be prescribed, maintain a register con-taining prescribed particulars of, or relating to,aquaculture licences.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-
section (1), a register under this section may bemaintained in electronic form.
(3) The Commission shall—
(a) ensure that the contents of a register
maintained under this section areavailable, at all reasonable times, forinspection (including, where practi-cable, inspection by electronic means,by the public) free of charge, and
(b) afford members of the public reason-
able facilities for obtaining from theCommission, on payment of reason-able charges, copies of entries in theregister.
(4) A register maintained under this section
shall be conclusive evidence as to the terms of anyaquaculture licence, or any condition to whichsuch a licence is subject, as that licence, or thatcondition, as the case may be, has effect for thetime being.
Fees in respect
of applicationsforaquaculturelicences, etc.53N.—(1) The Commission may in such man-
ner as may be prescribed, provide for the paymentto the Commission of fees in relation to—
(a) applications for aquaculture licences
under section 53B,
(b) the subsistence of an aquaculture
licence,
(c) applications for the variation of an
aquaculture licence under section 53H,
(d) applications for the surrender of an
aquaculture licence under section 53J,
(e) applications for the transfer of an aqua-
culture licence under section 53L.
(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may
provide for the refund (in whole or in part) of feesin prescribed circumstances.
Foyle and
CarlingfordAquacultureLicensingAppealsBoard.53O.—(1) There is hereby established a body
to be known as the Foyle and CarlingfordAquaculture Licensing Appeals Board (‘theAppeals Board’).
(2) The Appeals Board shall consist of 8
members to be appointed by the Council.
17Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
18[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(3) At least one of the members of the Appeals
Board shall be a solicitor or barrister qualified topractise in any part of the Foyle Area or theCarlingford Area.
(4) In appointing the other members of the
Appeals Board, the Council shall—
(a) have regard to the desirability of having
as members of the Appeals Board per-sons with knowledge and experience offisheries, aquaculture, financial mattersor environmental protection, and
(b) to the extent practicable, endeavour to
ensure that there is an equitablebalance between men and women inthe composition of the Appeals Board.
(5) The Council shall appoint a Chairperson
from among the members of the Appeals Board.
(6) The Minister may make regulations provid-
ing for the payment to the Appeals Board of feesin relation to appeals under section 53P.
(7) The Minister may make grants to the
Appeals Board out of moneys appropriated byAct of the Oireachtas.
(8) Such grants shall be of such amounts and
be made on such terms and conditions as the Mini-ster may determine.
(9) Schedule 3A shall have effect in relation to
the Appeals Board.
Appeals from
decisions withrespect toaquaculturelicences.53P.—(1) A person aggrieved by a decision of
the Commission—
(a) to grant or to refuse to grant an aquac-
ulture licence,
(b) to specify any condition in an aquacul-
ture licence,
(c) to vary an aquaculture licence under
section 53G,
(d) to vary or to refuse to vary an aquacul-
ture licence under section 53H,
(e) to revoke an aquaculture licence under
section 53I,
(f) to refuse to transfer an aquaculture
licence under section 53L,
(g) to refuse to accept the surrender of an
aquaculture licence under section 53J,
may appeal to the Appeals Board.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(2) An appeal to the Appeals Board shall be
made by sending a notice of appeal to the AppealsBoard so that it is received by the AppealsBoard—
(a) in the case of a decision of the Com-
mission to grant an aquaculture licenceor specify any condition in an aquacul-ture licence, not later than 28 daysafter the date on which notice to grantthe licence was last published inaccordance with section 53C(4),
(b) in the case of a decision by the Com-
mission to vary an aquaculture licenceunder section 53G or 53H, not laterthan 28 days after the date on whichnotice of the decision to vary thelicence was last published in accord-ance with section 53G(6),
(c) in the case of a decision of the
Commission—
(i) to refuse to grant an aquaculture
licence,
(ii) to refuse to vary an aquaculture
licence under section 53H,
(iii) to revoke an aquaculture licence
under section 53I, or
(iv) to refuse to transfer an aquaculture
licence under section 53L,
not later than 28 days after the date on
which notice of the disputed decisionwas received by the person aggrieved,
(d) in the case of a decision (or deemed
decision) of the Commission to refuseto accept the surrender of an aquacul-ture licence under section 53J, not laterthan 28 days after the date on which inaccordance with subsection (5) of thatsection, notice of the refusal was givento the applicant or, as the case may be,the Commission was deemed to haverefused the application.
(3) The Appeals Board may—
(a) confirm or set aside the decision which
is the subject of the appeal, or any partof it,
(b) substitute its decision on the matter for
that of the Commission.
(4) Where, on an appeal under subsection (1),
the Appeals Board determines that the decision of
19Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
20[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
the Commission should be altered, the Com-
mission shall give effect to that determination andshall publish in such manner and such form as maybe prescribed, notice of the determination.
(5) Schedule 3B shall have effect with respect
to appeals under subsection (1).
(6) The Minister may make regulations provid-
ing for such additional, incidental, consequentialor supplemental procedural matters in respect ofappeals to the Appeals Board as appear to theMinister to be necessary or expedient.
(7) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-
section (6), regulations under that subsection maymake provision—
(a) in relation to the class or classes of per-
sons who may be heard at an oralhearing,
(b) for the manner of the notification of the
determination of an appeal, and
(c) the availability for inspection by the
public of documents or extracts fromdocuments relating to appeals, theperiod of such availability, and the pur-chase by the public of copies of suchdocuments or extracts from suchdocuments.
Reasons to be
given fordecisions.53Q.—Where—
(a) the Commission gives any decision—
(i) to grant or refuse to grant an aqua-
culture licence,
(ii) to specify any condition in an aqua-
culture licence,
(iii) to vary an aquaculture licence
under section 53G,
(iv) to vary or refuse to vary an aquac-
ulture licence under section 53H,
(v) to revoke an aquaculture licence
under section 53I,
(vi) to refuse to transfer an aquaculture
licence under section 53L, or
(b) the Commission gives any decision, or is
deemed to give any decision, to refuseto accept the surrender of an aquacul-ture licence under section 53J, or
(c) the Appeals Board gives a decision in
relation to a dispute referred to it[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
under section 53G(7) or 53I(6) or
determines an Appeal under section53P,
it shall be the duty of the Commission or, as the
case may be, the Appeals Board, to state thereasons for the decision or determination.
Recapture of
escaped stock.53R.—(1) The Commission may take such
action as it considers necessary to recapture stockwhich has escaped from a licensed area.
(2) The Commission may, notwithstanding any
other provision of this Act, authorise—
(a) the holder of an aquaculture licence, or
(b) a person other than the holder of an
aquaculture licence,
to take such action as is specified in the authoris-
ation to recapture stock which has escaped from alicensed area.
(3) An authorisation referred to in subsection
(2) may be granted subject to such conditions, ifany, as the Commission considers necessary orexpedient.
(4) The reasonable costs of—
(a) any action taken by the Commission
under subsection (1),
(b) a person taking action in pursuance of
an authorisation under subsection (2),
may be recovered in a court of competent juris-
diction from the holder of the aquaculture licencewhose stock has escaped as a debt due and payableto the person who incurred the costs.
Offences of
making falseor misleadingstatements orfalse entries.53S.—(1) A person who, for the purpose of
obtaining for himself or for another any grant ofan aquaculture licence, any variation of an aquac-ulture licence or any transfer of an aquaculturelicence, makes a statement which he knows to befalse or misleading in a material particular, orrecklessly makes any statement which is false ormisleading in a material particular, shall be guiltyof an offence.
(2) A person who intentionally makes a false
entry in any record required to be kept by virtueof an aquaculture licence shall be guilty of anoffence.
(3) A person guilty of an offence under subsec-
tion (1) or (2) shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000, or
21Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
22[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \25,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 2 years,or to both.
Inquiries and
Inspections.53T.—(1) Without prejudice to section 82, the
Commission may, with respect to any licensedarea, make such inquiries and examination by anofficer of the Commission (within the meaning ofsection 54) or otherwise, and require from theholder of an aquaculture licence to which thelicensed area relates such information as the Com-mission considers necessary or proper, and theholder of the aquaculture licence shall afford allfacilities for such inquiries and examination, andgive such information, accordingly.
(2) Without prejudice to any provision of Part
VII, for the purpose of an examination under sub-section (1) an officer authorised in writing in thatbehalf by the Commission, on producing his auth-ority if so required, may at any reasonable time—
(a) enter any licensed area, and
(b) examine that area and all fish, buildings,
structures, rafts, trays, devices andother things found there, and
(c) obtain, take away and dispose of
samples (which shall be marked, lab-elled or otherwise made capable ofidentification) of any fish, animal orplant or of any water or other sub-stance, found there,
and the holder of an aquaculture licence shall
afford to such an officer facilities for the exerciseby him of any right conferred by this subsection.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as
authorising any person to enter—
(a) any enclosed garden,
(b) any dwelling house or the curtilage
thereof.
Regulations. 53U.—(1) Regulations made under this Part by
the Commission, shall be subject to the approvalof the Council.
(2) As soon as practicable after making any
regulations under this Part, the Commission or, asthe case may be, the Minister, shall publish in atleast two newspapers circulating in the Foyle Areaand the Carlingford Area a notice—
(a) stating that the regulations have been
made and giving a general descriptionof their content,[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(b) specifying a place at which, and the
hours between which, a copy of theregulations may be inspected.
(3) Regulations made under this Part by the
Commission or by the Minister, may contain suchsupplementary, incidental and transitional pro-vision as the Commission or, as the case may be,the Minister, thinks necessary or appropriate.
(4) The Minister shall cause every regulation
made under this Part by the Commission or theMinister to be laid before each House of theOireachtas as soon as may be after it is made and,if a resolution annulling the regulation is passedby either House, within the next twenty-one dayson which that House has sat after the regulationhas been laid before it, the regulation shall beannulled accordingly, but without prejudice to thevalidity of anything previously done thereunder.
Provisions in
respect ofcertain existinglicences.53V.—(1) This section applies to an aquacul-
ture licence which—
(a) is granted under the Fisheries
(Amendment) Act 1997,
(b) (i) is in force immediately before the
day on which this Part comes intooperation as respects the LouthArea, or
(ii) is the subject of an application to
which section 53W(2) refers,
and
(c) authorises the doing of any act in the
Louth Area,
but nothing in this section affects the operation of
such a licence in relation to any area other thanthe Louth Area.
(2) Subject to section 53W(2), a licence to
which this section applies shall, in so far as it auth-orises the doing of any act in the Louth Area, haveeffect on and after the day on which section 53Acomes into operation as respects the Louth Areaor from which the licence authorises the doing ofany act, whichever as respects the licence con-cerned is the later, as if granted by the Com-mission under section 53A.
Provisions in
respect ofcertainapplications.53W.—(1) Where an application under section
10 of the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997 for anaquaculture licence relating to the Louth Area hasbeen received by the Minister before the com-mencement of section 53A as respects the area tobe licensed and has not been determined by theMinister before such commencement, the appli-cation shall, on such commencement, be deemed
23Pt.2S . 4Pt.2S . 4
24[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
to be an application for an aquaculture licence
under this Act.
(2) Where the Minister determines an appli-
cation under section 10 of the Fisheries(Amendment) Act 1997 relating to the LouthArea prior to the coming into operation of section53A as respects the area to which the applicationrelates, and the time for making an appeal underPart III of the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997in relation to such a decision of the Minister hasnot expired at the date of such coming into oper-ation of section 53A then any appeal from thatdecision of the Minister shall be brought underPart III of the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), the provisions of
this Act and any regulations made under this Actrelating to aquaculture licences shall apply andhave effect in relation to applications to whichsubsection (1) applies as if the application weremade on the commencement of this section.
(4) Where, before the commencement of this
section, public notice has been given in relation toan application to which subsection (1) applies andinterested persons or bodies have been affordedan opportunity to make submissions or obser-vations in relation to the application, the require-ments of the regulations in relation to the givingof notice of an application for an aquaculturelicence or the making of submissions or obser-vations in relation to such an application shall notapply to that application.
(5) Where the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been provided for theCommission to decide an application to which sub-section (1) applies in accordance with the pro-visions of this Act, the requirements of the regu-lations in relation to the information which isrequired in respect of an application for an aquac-ulture licence shall not apply to that application.
Interpretation. 53X.—(1) In this Part—
‘Appeals Board’ means the Foyle and Carlingford
Aquaculture Licensing Appeals Board establishedby section 53O(1);
‘aquaculture’ means the farming or cultivation of
any fish, aquatic invertebrate animal or aquaticplant, including any aquatic form of food suitablefor the nutrition of fish;
‘aquaculture licence’ means an aquaculture licence
applied for or granted under this Part;
‘licensed area’ means the area specified in an
aquaculture licence;
‘notice’ means a notice in writing;[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
‘notice of appeal’ means an appeal under section
53P;
‘prescribed’ means prescribed by regulations;
‘regulations’ (except in sections 53O(6) and
53P(6)) means regulations made by the Com-mission under this Part;
‘the Act of 1952’ means the Foyle Fisheries Act
1952;
‘vary’, in relation to the conditions of an aquacul-
ture licence, means adding to them or varying orrescinding any of them, and ‘variation’ shall beconstrued accordingly.
(2) In this Part, ‘fish’ (when used without
qualification) means—
(a) freshwater fish of any kind,
(b) salmon and other fish of a kind that
migrates to and from the sea,
(c) eels and elvers,
(d) sea-fish,
(e) shell-fish,
(f) the spawn, fry, spat and brood of any
fish,
(g) any part of any fish.
(3) In subsection (2)( a), ‘freshwater fish’ means
any fish living in freshwater, other than a kind offish that migrates to and from the sea.”.
(2) The matter set out in Schedule 1 shall be inserted after the
Third Schedule to the Act of 1952 as Schedule 3A and Schedule 3Bto that Act.
PART 3
Amendments to the Principal Act
5.—Section 2 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) for the definition of “ ‘the Commission’ ” substitute
“ ‘the Commission’ means the Foyle, Carlingfordand Irish Lights Commission being the Bodyreferred to in section 32 of the British-Irish Agree-ment Act 1999;”,
(ii) in the definition of “ ‘prescribed’ ” to insert after
“ ‘prescribed’ ” “except in Part VIA,”,
25Pt.2S . 4
Definitions.Pt.3S . 5
26[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(iii) for the definition of “‘river’” there shall be
substituted—
“ ‘river’ includes a branch of a river
and any stream, lake, estuary or
watercourse;”,
(iv) for the definition of “‘waters’” there shall be
substituted—
“ ‘waters’ includes any river or part of
the sea;”,
(v) at the appropriate place there shall be inserted the
following definition—
“‘several fishery’ means any fishery
lawfully possessed and enjoyed assuch under any title whatsoever,being a good and valid title at law,exclusively of the public by any per-son or persons whether in navigablewaters or in waters not navigable, andwhether the soil covered by suchwaters is vested in such person or per-sons or in any other person;”,
(b) for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—
“(2) In this Act, except in Part VIA, ‘fish’ (when used
without any qualification) means—
(a) freshwater fish of any kind,
(b) salmon and other fish of a kind that migrates to
and from the sea,
(c) sea bass and tope,
(d) eels and elvers,
(e) mussels,
(f) oysters,
(g) the spawn, fry, spat and brood of any kind of
fish mentioned in paragraphs ( a)t o( f),
(h) any part of any kind of fish mentioned in para-
graphs ( a)t o( f).
(3) In subsection (2)( a), ‘freshwater fish’ means any fish
living in freshwater, other than a kind of fish that migratesto and from the sea.
(4) In this Act, any reference to a river includes a refer-
ence to the channel or bed of a river which is for the timebeing dry.”.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
6.—(1) Section 11 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (2)—
(i) in paragraph ( b) by the substitution of “generally,
and” for “generally.”, and
(ii) by the insertion after paragraph ( b) of the following
paragraph:
“(c) such other functions as are conferred on the
Commission by or under this Act or anyother statutory provision.”,
and
(b) by the insertion after subsection (2) of the following
subsection:
“(2A) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection
(2), the Commission may, for the purposes of its functionsunder that subsection—
(a) provide education or training courses or facili-
ties for training or instruction,
(b) co-operate with other bodies having functions
similar to those of the Commission,
(c) carry out such research as it considers necessary,
(d) make charges for facilities, amenities and
services provided by the Commission.”.
(2) The Third Schedule to the Act of 1952 is amended by the
deletion in paragraph (2)(1)( c) of the words “for the government,
management, maintenance or improvement of the fisheries of theFoyle Area”.
7.—Section 13 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), after paragraph ( g), there shall be
inserted the following paragraph:
“(gg) the regulation or prohibition of the sale of any
species of fish caught by rod and line,”,
(b) in subsection (2) by the insertion, after “licence” of “, tag”,
(c) by the insertion after subsection (2) of the following sub-
sections:
“(2A) Regulations made by virtue of subsection (2)
may—
(a) provide for charging concessionary fees in such
cases as may be prescribed,
(b) provide for exemption from payment of the pre-
scribed fees in such cases as may be prescribed.
27Pt.3
Functions of
Commission.
Regulation of
fishing.Pt.3S . 7
Restrictions on
number of licences.
28[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(2B) Regulations made by the Commission under this
section may—
(a) require tags issued by the Commission to be
attached to the carcasses of fish,
(b) require applications for fishing licences to be
accompanied by a photograph of the applicantand particulars of the applicant’s date of birth,
(c) prescribe the form of, and conditions attaching
to, fishing licences issued by the Commission,
(d) provide that a fishing licence to fish with a rod
and line or hand line shall not be transferable,and
(e) regulate the transfer of other fishing licences.”,
(d) by the substitution of the following subsections for subsec-
tion (3):
“(3) As soon as practicable after it makes any regu-
lations under this section the Commission shall publish anotice in the Iris Oifigiu ´iland in at least two newspapers
circulating in the Foyle Area and the Carlingford Area—
(a) stating that the regulations have been made and
giving a general description of their content,and
(b) specifying a place at which, and the hours
between which, a copy of the regulations maybe inspected.
(3A) Regulations made by the Commission under this
section may contain such supplementary, incidental andtransitional provisions as the Commission thinks necessaryor appropriate.”.
8.—The Act of 1952 is amended by the substitution for section 14
of the following section:
“Restrictions
on number oflicences.14.—(1) The number of fishing licences which
may be issued by the Commission in any year forfishing with fishing engines of any kind (other thanrod and line) in—
(a) the tidal waters of the Foyle Area, or
(b) the tidal waters of the Carlingford
Area, or
(c) any prescribed part of those waters,
shall not exceed such number as may be pre-
scribed in relation to those waters or that part.
(2) If the number of applications duly made for
licences in any year exceeds the maximum numberprescribed by virtue of this section, the licences[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
shall be allocated in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
9.—The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion after section 14
(inserted by section 8 of this Act) of the following section:
“Acquisition
anddevelopmentof waters forangling.14A.—(1) The Commission may, for the pur-
pose of developing or improving facilities forangling, acquire by agreement—
(a) fishing rights in any waters in the Foyle
Area or the Carlingford Area,
(b) any estate in land by virtue of which
such rights are exercisable,
(c) any estate in any other land which the
Commission is satisfied it is expedientto acquire for the safeguarding or thefull enjoyment or exploitation ofthose rights.
(2) Where fishing rights in respect of any
waters have been acquired by the Commissionunder subsection (1)( a), the Commission may do
all such things as are necessary or expedient—
(a) for the proper development of those
waters, and of any land acquired undersubsection (1)( b)o r( c), for angling, or
(b) for the provision of facilities or ameni-
ties for persons authorised by theCommission to enter such land.”.
10.—The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion after section
14A (inserted by section 9 of this Act) of the following section:
“Permits to
fish inCommission’swaters.14B.—(1) Where the Commission owns or
manages the fishing rights in any waters—
(a) the Commission may issue permits, or
make arrangements for their issuethrough agents, authorising the holderof such a permit to use a rod and linein the waters to which the permitrelates, and
(b) may, subject to subsection (2), charge
for the issue of such permits such sumsas may be prescribed.
(2) The Commission may under subsection
(1)(a) issue complimentary permits to such per-
sons as may be prescribed in such circumstancesas may be prescribed and nothing in this Act shall
require such persons to make any payment inrespect of such a permit.
29Pt.3S . 8
Acquisition and
development ofwaters for angling.
Permits to fish in
Commission’swaters.Pt.3 S.10
Close seasons and
times.
Unlicensed fishing,
etc.
30[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(3) A permit issued under subsection (1)( a)
shall be granted for such period, and subject tosuch conditions, as may be specified in the permit.
(4) Where a permit is issued under subsection
(1)(a) in relation to any waters, any person who—
(a) without obtaining such a permit, uses a
rod and line in those waters,
(b) contravenes any condition to which a
permit is subject,
(c) uses or, with intent to deceive, presents
a permit for any time, date, period,place or purpose other than that forwhich that permit is valid,
(d) uses or presents, as being a permit of
which he is the holder, a permit issuedin the name of any other person, or
(e) uses or presents a permit that has been
to his knowledge either in any manneraltered (otherwise than by a personduly authorised by the Commission) orfraudulently counterfeited,
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.”.
11.—(1) The Act of 1952 is amended in section 28 by the inser-
tion, after subsection (4) of the following subsections:
“(5) Different periods may be prescribed under this section
in respect of different kinds of fish and, where a period is soprescribed for a particular kind of fish, references in this Act tothe annual close season, the annual close season for angling orthe weekly close time shall, as the case may require, be con-strued in relation to that kind of fish as references to the periodso prescribed.
(6) Regulations may provide that this section and sections 29
and 30 shall not apply to fish of a prescribed kind.”.
(2) The Act of 1952 is amended in sections 29 and 30 after the
words “salmon or trout” wherever those words occur there shall beinserted the words “or any other fish of a kind prescribed for thepurposes of this section”.
(3) The Act of 1952 is amended in section 34 for the words “an-
nual close season or weekly close time” there shall be substituted thewords “annual close season for salmon or trout or weekly close timefor salmon or trout”.
(4) The Act of 1952 is amended in section 35 by the deletion of
subsection (4).
12.—At the beginning of Part VI of the Act of 1952 there shall
be inserted—[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
“Unlicensed fishing, etc.
Prohibition of
unlicensedfishing.35A.—(1) A person shall not fish for, take or
kill salmon, or such other kinds of fish as may beprescribed for the purposes of this section
except—
(a) under the authority of a fishing licence,
and
(b) in accordance with the terms and con-
ditions of that licence and of any regu-lations relating to it.
(2) A person shall not have in his possession,
in or near any fishing place, any fishing engine forthe taking or killing of salmon, or such other kindsof fish as may be prescribed for the purposes ofthis section which is erected or in fishing order,unless there is in force a fishing licence by virtueof which he is authorised to use that fishing engineat that place.
(3) A person who acts, or causes or permits
another person to act, in contravention of subsec-tion (1) or (2) shall be guilty of an offence againstthis Act.
(4) If any person using at any place a fishing
engine for which a fishing licence is required underthis Act, or having such a fishing engine erectedor in fishing order in his possession in or near anyfishing place, fails on demand to produce to anauthorised person a fishing licence by virtue ofwhich he is authorised to use that fishing engineat that place, he shall be guilty of an offenceagainst this Act and liable on summary convictionto a fine not exceeding \2,500.
(5) A person who—
(a) uses, or, with intent to deceive, presents
a fishing licence for any time, date,period, place or purpose other thanthat for which that licence is valid, or
(b) uses or presents, as being a fishing
licence of which he is the holder, a fish-ing licence issued in the name of anyother person, or
(c) uses or presents a fishing licence that
has been to his knowledge either inany manner altered (otherwise than bya person duly authorised by theCommission) or fraudulentlycounterfeited,
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.
31Pt.3 S.12Pt.3 S.12
32[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(6) In a prosecution relating to an offence
under this section by reason of a contravention ofsubsection (1) it shall be sufficient—
(a) where the contravention consists only of
the use or possession of a rod and lineor hand line, to describe the offence as‘unlicensed angling contrary to section35A of the Foyle Fisheries Act 1952’,and
(b) in any other case, to describe the
offence as ‘fishing by unlicensed meanscontrary to section 35A of the FoyleFisheries Act 1952’.
(7) In this section and in section 35B ‘fishing
licence’ means—
(a) a licence issued by the Commission
under regulations made by the Com-mission under this Act, or
(b) a licence corresponding to a licence
mentioned in paragraph ( a) and issued
by a body approved for the purpose ofthis paragraph by the Council.
(8) This section is subject to section 35B.
Exceptions,
defences, etc.in relation tooffences undersection 35A.35B.—(1) Subsections (1) and (2) of section
35A do not apply in relation to anything which aperson is expressly empowered to do under anyprovision made by or under this Act or any otherstatutory provision.
(2) Nothing in section 35A applies to a
person—
(a) who fishes lawfully by rod and line in
a production pond at a licensed area(within the meaning of section 53X), or
(b) who has for that purpose in his pos-
session a rod or line at or near alicensed area.
(3) In subsection (2) ‘production pond’ means
a pond—
(a) used for the artificial propagation and
culture of fish, and
(b) designated by the Commission for the
purposes of this subsection as a pro-duction pond in an aquaculturelicence.
(4) Where a person is charged under section
35A with an offence which consists of taking fishwhich he is not licensed to take, it shall be a gooddefence for him to prove that—[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(a) at the time when that fish was taken, he
was engaged in lawfully fishing foranother kind of fish, and
(b) that the first-mentioned fish was taken
unintentionally and, immediately uponbeing taken, was returned to the waterwithout any avoidable injury.
(5) Where a person is charged under section
35A with an offence which consists of—
(a) having a fishing engine in his possession
as mentioned in subsection (2) of thatsection, or
(b) a failure to produce a fishing licence for
a fishing engine in any of the circum-stances referred to in subsection (4) ofthat section,
it shall be a good defence for him to prove that he
had the fishing engine in his possession as manu-facturer or seller thereof and not for the purposeof using it.
(6) A person shall not be prosecuted for an
offence under section 35A consisting of failure toproduce a fishing licence for a fishing engine inany of the circumstances referred to in subsection(4) of that section if upon demand being made byan authorised person for the production of a fish-ing licence under that subsection, the first men-tioned person—
(a) then and there gives to the authorised
person his name and address and anyevidence of his identity then availableand also gives a reasonable expla-nation of his failure to produce thefishing licence at that time, and
(b) within 5 days thereafter, and in accord-
ance with any reasonable requirementthen communicated to him by theauthorised person, produces to theauthorised person or to any other per-son designated by him—
(i) a fishing licence authorising him to
use the fishing engine at that placeand time, and
(ii) evidence of his identity.”.
13.—(1) In section 38(1) of the Act of 1952—
(a) for the words “one and three-quarter inches” there shall
be substituted “4.5 centimetres”, and
33Pt.3 S.12
Metrication.Pt.3 S.13
Use of nets across
rivers.
Penalty for
Pollution.
34[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(b) for the words “seven inches” there shall be substituted
“18 centimetres”.
(2) In section 39(1) for the words “half a mile” (where they twice
occur) there shall be substituted “805 metres”.
14.—Section 39 of the Act of 1952 is amended by substituting for
subsection (2) the following:
“(2) If a person—
(a) shoots, draws or stretches a net across the mouth or
across any other part of a river, and
(b) fails to leave open a channel which is—
(i) at least one-quarter of the width of the mouth of
the river or, as the case may be, of that otherpart of the river, and
(ii) of sufficient depth and width to facilitate the
passage of salmon in that river,
he shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.”.
15.—The Act of 1952 is amended by inserting after section 41 the
following section:
“Penalty for
Pollution.42.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), if any person
causes or knowingly permits any deleteriousmatter to enter any river he shall be guilty of anoffence against this Act and shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not
exceeding \5,000,
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine
not exceeding \20,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 2 years,or to both.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall operate to
penalise the discharge by any person of any dyestuff or other trade effluent which he proves is notin a state harmful to fish or other live animals.
(3) Where a person (in this section referred
to as ‘the person convicted’) has been convicted ofan offence under subsection (1), theCommission—
(a) after consulting the owner of the fishing
rights in the waters affected by the pol-lution, or
(b) without such consultation if the Com-
mission, upon making reasonableenquiries, is unable to ascertain thename and address of the owner,[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
may—
(i) carry out such reinstatement of the
waters as is reasonable in the circum-stances, and
(ii) recover the cost thereof from the per-
son convicted.
(4) Any question as to—
(a) the reasonableness of any reinstatement
to be undertaken under paragraph (i)of subsection (3), or
(b) the costs to be recoverable under para-
graph (ii) of that subsection,
may be referred to arbitration under and in
accordance with the provisions of the ArbitrationActs 1954 to 1998.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect any right
of the owner of fishing rights in the waters affectedby the pollution to bring civil proceedings againstthe person convicted; but in assessing damages inany such proceedings the court shall take intoaccount the value of any reinstatement carried outby the Commission under subsection (3).
(6) Subsection (5) applies in relation to any
such right vested in the Commission.”.
16.—Section 43 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) by substituting for subsection (1) the following subsection:
“(1) If, for the purpose of taking or facilitating the tak-
ing of any fish, any person uses or has in his possession orcontrol, in any river or on or near the banks thereof—
(a) any light or fire, or
(b) any electrical or acoustical apparatus of any
kind,
he shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.”,
(b) in subsection (3) by the deletion of “gaff or” in paragraphs
(a) and ( b),
(c) by the insertion after subsection (3) of the following
subsection:
“(3A) If any person throws, releases or discharges any
missile or other object into any water for the purpose oftaking or killing, or facilitating the taking or killing, of anyfish, he shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.”,
and
35Pt.3 S.15
Use of certain
devices to take fish.Pt.3 S.16
Fishing by cross
lines.
Taking fish
unlawfully killed orfound dead.
Taking, etc. spawn,
smolts or fry ofsalmon or trout.
36[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(d) by the insertion after subsection (4) of the following
subsection:
“(5) In this section—
‘gaff’ means a hooked instrument (with or without a barb)
used to penetrate the gills or body of a fish; and
‘otter’ means an otter lath or jack, and includes any instru-
ment, whether used with a handline, or as an auxiliary toa rod and line, or otherwise for the purpose of running outlures, artificial or otherwise.”.
17.—Section 44 of the Act of 1952 shall be renumbered as subsec-
tion (1) of that section and after that subsection there shall beinserted the following subsection:
“(2) In subsection (1) ‘cross lines’ means fishing lines—
(a) reaching from one position to another across water
and fixed or held at each of their ends, and
(b) having attached to them one or more baited hooks or
lures, artificial or otherwise.”.
18.—Section 46 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (2)—
(i) in paragraph ( d) for “sanitary officer” there shall be
substituted “person acting under the authority of alocal authority, or”,
(ii) by the insertion after paragraph ( d) of the following
paragraph:
“(e) a private river watcher appointed to protect
the waters in question.”,
(b) by the insertion after subsection (2) of the following
subsection:
“(3) Where a person mentioned in subsection (2)( a),
(c), (d)o r( e) removes fish from a river as mentioned in
subsection (1) or causes fish to be so removed, he shallinform the Commission of that fact as soon as ispracticable.”.
19.—Section 47 of the Act of 1952 shall be renumbered as subsec-
tion (1) of that section and after that subsection there shall be
inserted the following subsection:
“(2) It shall be a defence for a person charged with an
offence under subsection (1)( a) in relation to the spawn of any
salmon or trout to prove—
(a) that the spawn had been produced—[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(i) at a place specified in an aquaculture licence
under the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997, or
(ii) in a licensed area (within the meaning of section
53X), or
(b) that he believed on reasonable grounds that it had
been so produced.
(3) If any person removes any material from the bed of the
freshwater portion of any river in the Moville Area or theLouth Area—
(a) without the consent of the Commission under subsec-
tion (4), or
(b) otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of a
consent granted by the Commission under subsec-tion (4),
he shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.
(4) The Commission may, on the application of any person,
grant its consent to the removal of material from the bed of thefreshwater portion of a river on such conditions as it thinks fit.
(5) A consent under subsection (4) does not confer on any
person a right to remove material from the bed of a river which(apart from this section) he would not otherwise have.
(6) Nothing done under and in accordance with the con-
ditions of a consent under subsection (4) constitutes an offenceunder subsection (1) or section 48.”.
20.—(1) Section 54 of the Act of 1952, is amended by the substi-
tution of the following definition:
“ ‘officer of the Commission’ means an inspector or fishery
officer appointed under section 55;”.
(2) Section 55(1)( b) of the Act of 1952 is amended by the substi-
tution of “fishery officer” for “river watcher”.
21.—(1) Section 56 of the Act of 1952 is amended by the substi-
tution for subsections (2) to (4) of the following subsections:
“(2) A person appointed to be a river watcher shall not act
in that capacity until his appointment is confirmed by the appro-priate court.
(3) A person making application under subsection (2) for
confirmation of the appointment of a person as a river watchershall, not less than 14 days before the date of the hearing ofthe application, give notice in writing of the application to theCommission, and the Commission shall be entitled to appearbefore the court, be heard and adduce evidence on the hearingof the application, and may do so by one of its officers or bysolicitor or counsel.
37Pt.3 S.19
Officers of the
Commission.
River watchers.Pt.3 S.21
38[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(4) The confirmation of the appointment of a person as a
river watcher shall be effected by the District Judge of theappropriate court endorsing the instrument of appointment.
(5) The appropriate court may, upon complaint made to it,
revoke the appointment of the river watcher, and thereupon theappointment shall be terminated.
(6) Where a person who has appointed a river watcher
revokes that appointment, he shall, within 14 days of the revo-cation, serve written notice thereof on the District Court clerkof the appropriate court.
(7) Where—
(a) the appointment of a person as a river watcher has
been confirmed under subsection (4) or revokedunder subsection (5), or
(b) notice of the revocation of such an appointment has
been received under subsection (6),
the District Court clerk of the appropriate court shall notify the
Commission of such confirmation or revocation or, as the casemay be, such notice, as soon as practicable.
(8) Any person who appoints another person to act as a river
watcher shall, not later than 31 January in each year, make tothe Commission a return in such form and containing such infor-mation as may be prescribed.
(9) The Commission shall maintain a register of the names
and addresses of those who are entitled to act as river watchersand descriptions of the geographical areas in which each of suchpersons is entitled to so act.
(10) If any person—
(a) acts as a river watcher without having his appointment
confirmed under subsection (4),
(b) so acts after his appointment has been revoked either
by a court under subsection (5) or by the personappointing him, or
(c) so acts after he has ceased to be a river watcher by
virtue of section 56A,
he shall be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall be
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \1,500.
(11) In this section and sections 56A and 56B ‘the appro-
priate court’, in relation to a river watcher, means a court ofsummary jurisdiction sitting for the District Court district (orany one such district where there is more than one) within whichthe river watcher is appointed to act and ‘District Court clerk’
shall be construed accordingly.”.
(2) The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion after section 56
of the following sections:[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
“Duration of
appointmentof riverwatchers.56A.—(1) Any person whose appointment as a
river watcher is confirmed after the coming intooperation of section 21 of the Foyle and
Carlingford Fisheries Act 2007 shall, unless his
appointment is renewed under section 56B, ceaseto be a river watcher on the expiration of 5 yearsfrom the date of that confirmation.
(2) Any person whose appointment as a river
watcher was confirmed before the coming intooperation of that section shall, unless his appoint-ment is renewed under section 55B, cease to be ariver watcher—
(a) on the expiration of the period of 5
years from the date of that confir-mation, or
(b) on the expiration of the period of 1 year
from the coming into operation ofthat section,
whichever is the later.
(3) A person who ceases by virtue of this
section to be a river watcher may be re-appointedas such under section 56.
Renewal of
appointmentas riverwatcher.56B.—(1) Where a person (‘the applicant’)
intends to renew the appointment of a riverwatcher, he shall, not less than 6 weeks before thedate on which the appointment is to cease to haveeffect, serve a notice, in such form and containingsuch particulars as may be prescribed, on—
(a) the District Court clerk, and
(b) the Commission.
(2) Where the Commission objects to the
renewal of the appointment of a river watcher, itshall, within 21 days of receiving a notice undersubsection (1), notify the applicant and the DistrictCourt clerk of its objection and of the groundsthereof.
(3) Where, within the time specified in subsec-
tion (2), the District Court clerk has received nonotice of an objection under that subsection, theDistrict Judge assigned to the district concernedmay confirm the appointment and endorse theinstrument of appointment to that effect.
(4) Where the Commission notifies the appli-
cant that there is an objection to the renewal ofthe appointment, the applicant may apply to thecourt for confirmation of the renewal of theappointment.
(5) A person making application under subsec-
tion (4) for confirmation of the renewal of theappointment of a person as a river watcher shall,
39Pt.3 S.21Pt.3 S.21
Seizure and disposal
of certain articles.
Powers of
authorised persons.
40[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
not less than 14 days before the date of the hearing
of the application, give notice in writing of theapplication to the Commission, and the Com-mission shall be entitled to appear before theCourt, be heard and adduce evidence on the hear-ing of the application, and may do so by one of itsofficers or by solicitor or counsel.
(6) The confirmation of the renewal of the
appointment of a person as a river watcher pursu-ant to an application under subsection (4) shall beeffected by the District Judge endorsing the instru-ment of appointment.
(7) Where the appointment of a person as a
river watcher has been renewed under this section,the District Court clerk shall notify the Com-mission of that renewal as soon as practicable.”.
22.—(1) Section 59(1) of the Act of 1952 is amended by inserting
after paragraph ( f) the following paragraph:
“(ff) seize any equipment (of whatever nature) which has
been, or is being, used for facilitating the unlawfultaking of any fish,”.
(2) Section 65 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) by substituting for the words from the beginning of the
section to “any boat or fishing engine, he shall,” thefollowing:
“(1) Where a person seizes in the State any boat or fish-
ing engine in exercise of powers conferred on him by thisPart or any equipment in exercise of the power conferredby section 59(1)( ff), he shall”,
(b) in subsection ( a) and ( c) by substituting “had recently
been” for “had been”,
(c) by inserting after subsection ( c) the following subsection:
“(cc) if, in case of any equipment seized under section
59(1)( ff), the court finds that at the time of its
seizure it had been, was being, or was about tobe used to facilitate the unlawful taking of fish,the court shall order it to be forfeited;”,
and
(d) in subsection ( d) by substituting “, fishing engine or equip-
ment” for “or fishing engine”.
23.—Section 59 of the Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion
after subsection (1) of the following subsections:
“(1A) An officer of the Commission exercising any power
under this Act may be accompanied and assisted by—
(a) an officer of the Minister,[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(b) an officer of a regional board (within the meaning of
the Fisheries Act 1980).
(1B) Without prejudice to subsection (1)( a), an authorised
person other than a private river watcher may for the purposeof preventing or detecting the commission of any offence againstany provision of this Act at any time enter on and traverse anyland either on foot or, where there is a suitable roadway, laneor path, in a motor vehicle.
(1C) Where by virtue of subsection (1B) an authorised per-
son brings a motor vehicle onto any land, he shall not cause orpermit that vehicle to stand or remain in such a position as tocause or be likely to cause any danger or obstruction.
(1D) An authorised person, on leaving any land which he has
entered by virtue of this section, shall leave that land as effectu-ally secured against trespassers as he found it.”.
24.—The Act of 1952 is amended by substituting the following
section for section 60:
“Power of
judge of theDistrict Courtto issuewarrant toenter certainpremises.60.—(1) If a Judge of the District Court is satis-
fied by complaint on oath that the first conditionis satisfied and that the second or third conditionis satisfied the Judge may issue a warrant authoris-ing an authorised person to enter any premises, ifnecessary using reasonable force, for any of thepurposes mentioned in section 64(1).
(2) The complaint shall include—
(a) a statement as to whether any represen-
tations have been made by the occu-pier of the premises to an authorisedperson concerning the purpose forwhich the warrant is sought,
(b) a summary of any such representations.
(3) The first condition is that there are reason-
able grounds for an authorised person to enter thepremises for that purpose.
(4) The second condition is that each of the fol-
lowing applies to the occupier of the premises:
(a) he has been informed of the decision to
seek entry to the premises and of thereasons for that decision;
(b) he has failed to allow entry to the prem-
ises on being requested to do so by an
authorised person;
(c) he has been informed of the decision to
apply for the warrant.
(5) The third condition is that—
41Pt.3 S.23
Warrants to enter
certain premises.Pt.3 S.24
Apprehension of
offenders.
Powers of
inspection,examination anddetention.
42[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(a) the premises are unoccupied or the
occupier is absent and (in either case)notice of intention to apply for thewarrant has been left in a conspicuousplace on the premises, or
(b) an application for admission to the
premises or the giving of notice ofintention to apply for the warrantwould defeat the object of enteringthe premises.
(6) A warrant issued under this section shall
not continue in force for more than 7 days fromthe date of its issue by the Judge of the DistrictCourt, which date shall be clearly visible on thewarrant.
(7) A warrant issued under this section shall be
executed only at a reasonable hour unless other-wise authorised by the warrant.
(8) A person authorised to enter premises by
virtue of a warrant issued under this section—
(a) may take with him such other persons
and such equipment as he considersmay be necessary, and
(b) shall, on leaving any unoccupied prem-
ises which he has entered by virtue ofsuch a warrant, leave them as effectu-ally secured against trespassers as hefound them.
(9) In this section ‘authorised person’ does not
include a private river watcher.”.
25.—Section 62 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)( b) by inserting “to the satisfaction of the
authorised person” after “name and address”,
(b) by the substitution for subsection (2) of the following
subsection:
“(2) If any person fails to give his name and address to
the satisfaction of an authorised person when required todo so in accordance with subsection (1)( b), he shall be
guilty of an offence against this Act.”,
and
(c) by the deletion of subsection (3).
26.—Section 64 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)—[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(i) in paragraph ( g) after “take the name and address”
by inserting “and date of birth”,
(ii) in paragraph ( g) by substituting “such fish or other
article,” for “such fish or other article.”, and
(iii) by inserting after paragraph ( g) the following
paragraph:
“(h) to demand and take the name, address and
date of birth of any person who is fishingor whom he reasonably suspects to beabout to fish or to have fished within thepreceding half hour.”,
(b) by substituting the following subsections for subsection
(5):
“(5) Every person who refuses to give his own name
and address and date of birth to the satisfaction of theauthorised officer or the name and address of any otherperson (so far as known to him) when lawfully demandedunder this section shall be guilty of an offence against thisAct and shall be liable on summary conviction to a finenot exceeding \5,000.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as author-
ising an authorised officer to enter—
(a) an enclosed garden, or
(b) any dwelling house or the curtilage thereof.”.
27.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) each section of the Act of 1952
mentioned in column (1) ofSchedule 2 is amended to the extent
specified in column (2) of that Schedule opposite such mention.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) , section 3 of the Act of 1983 is
repealed.
(3) This section shall have effect as respects offences committed
after the coming into operation of this section.
(4) The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion after section 69
of the following new section:
“Costs and
expensesrelating toprosecutions.69A.—Where a person is convicted of an
offence under this Act, committed after the com-ing into operation of this section, the Court shall,unless it is satisfied that there are special and sub-stantial reasons for not so doing, order the personto pay to the Commission the costs and expenses,measured by the court, incurred by the Com-mission in relation to the investigation, detectionand prosecution of the offence, including costs andexpenses incurred in the taking of samples and thecarrying out of tests, examinations and analyses.”.
43Pt.3 S.26
Penalties for
offences.Pt.3
Exemption for acts
done forimprovement offisheries, etc.
44[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
28.—The Act of 1952 is amended by substituting the following
section for section 70:
“Saving for
acts done forartificialpropagation,scientificpurposes orimprovementof thefisheries.70.—(1) Nothing in this Act shall prohibit any-
thing done for the purpose of the artificial propa-gation of fish, for some scientific purpose or for
the improvement of any fishery—
(a) by the Commission,
(b) by a person to whom a permit is issued
under this section (or any other personacting under his directions), under theauthority of, and subject to the con-ditions of, that permit.
(2) The Commission may, by permit in writing
and subject to any specified conditions, authoriseany named person to do, at any season of the year,any specified things for any of the purposes men-tioned in subsection (1) and in particular, withoutprejudice to the generality of the foregoing—
(a) to catch fish of any specified kind and
to have in his possession fish of thatkind or their ova for the purpose ofartificial propagation, transplantation,the stocking, restocking or improve-ment of any fishery or for any scientificpurpose, and for the purpose of socatching to have in his possession,erect and use any fishing engine of aspecified kind or to have in his pos-session and use any substance of aspecified kind,
(b) to buy or sell ova or fry of fish of any
specified kind for the purpose of stock-ing or restocking, or for any scientificpurpose,
(c) to dispose of fish taken in accordance
with the terms of the permit in suchmanner and on such terms as may bespecified.
(3) A permit under this section shall not auth-
orise anything to be done in relation to a severalfishery otherwise than with the consent of theowner of that fishery.
(4) A person to whom a permit has been given
by the Commission shall, if when doing anythingpursuant to the permit he is so requested by anauthorised person, produce the permit to thatperson.
(5) In this section ‘specified’ means specified in
a permit.”.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
29.—(1) The Act of 1952 is amended by the substitution for
section 76 of the following section:
“Forfeiture of
boats, fishingengines etc.76.—Where a person is convicted of an offence
under this Act the Court by which he is convictedmay make such other order as to the forfeitureof—
(a) any fish illegally taken by him or in his
possession at the time of the offence,
(b) any boat, fishing engine, equipment or
other thing by means or in respect ofwhich the offence is committed,
as the Court thinks fit.”.
(2) Section 77 of the Act of 1952 is repealed.
30.—The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion after section 73
of the following section:
“Judicial
Review.73A.—(1) A person may, by way of, and only
by way of, an application for judicial review underOrder 84 of the Rules of the Superior Courts (S.I.No. 15 of 1986) (in this section referred to as ‘theOrder’) question the validity of—
(a) a decision of the Commission under
Part VIA of this Act, or
(b) a decision on or determination of an
appeal by the Appeals Board underPart VIA of this Act.
(2) The High Court shall not decline to con-
sider an application for judicial review under theOrder relating to a decision or determinationreferred to in subsection (1) by reason only of thefact that the decision or determination the subjectof the application—
(a) was made, or is to be or may be made,
outside the State, or
(b) relates to a place that is outside the
State.
(3) In relation to an application referred to in
subsection (1), no rule of law or procedure shallprevent the Court giving leave for service of theapplication or notice of the application concernedto a person affected who is outside the State.”.
31.—The Act of 1952 is amended by the insertion after section 83
of the following section:
“Calculation of
time periods.84.—(1) In this Act, or any regulations made
under this Act, where a period of time is expressed
45Pt.3
Forfeiture of boats,
equipment etc.
Judicial Review.
Calculation of time
periods.Pt.3 S.31
Enforcement of
private fishingrights.
Miscellaneous
amendments to Actof 1952.
46[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
to begin on, or be reckoned from, a particular day,
that day shall not be included in the period.
(2) In this Act, or any regulations made under
this Act, where a period of time is expressed toend on, or to be reckoned to, a particular day, thatday shall be included in the period.
(3) In this Act, or any regulations made under
this Act, where the time limited for the doing ofanything expires on a Saturday, Sunday or a publicholiday, the time so limited shall extend to and thething may be done on the first following day thatis not a Saturday, Sunday or a public holiday.
(4) Where any document or notice is received
by the Commission or the Appeals Board outsidethe business hours of the Commission, or as thecase may be, the Appeals Board, the document ornotice shall be deemed to have been received onthe first following day which is not a Saturday,Sunday or public holiday.
(5) In subsections (3) and (4)—
(a) ‘business hours’ means such hours as
may be prescribed for the purposes ofthis section,
(b) ‘public holiday’ means any day which is
prescribed for the purposes of thissection.”.
32.—(1) Paragraph 2 of the Third Schedule to the Act of 1952
shall be renumbered as subparagraph (1) of that paragraph.
(2) Subparagraph (1) (as renumbered by subsection (1)) of para-
graph 2 of the Third Schedule to the Act of 1952 is amended by theinsertion after clause ( d) of the following clause:
“(e) enter into an agreement to enforce the fishing rights
of any owner or occupier of land or waters in accord-ance with such terms and conditions as may be speci-fied in the agreement and on payment of such sumsas may be so specified.”.
33.—(1) Section 13 of the Act of 1952 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)( g) by the substitution of “fishing
licences” for “licences”,
(b) in subsection (1)( k) by the insertion after “Act” of “,
except in Part VIA,”, and
(c) in subsection (2) by the substitution of “fishing licence”
for “licence”.
(2) Section 35(4) of the Act of 1952 is amended in paragraph ( c)
by the substitution of “fishing licence” for “licence” where thatword occurs.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(3) Section 40(3) of the Act of 1952 is amended by the substi-
tution of “fishing licence” for “licence”.
(4) Section 75 of the Act of 1952 is amended by the substitution
of “fishing licence” for “licence” wherever that word occurs.
PART 4
Miscellaneous Amendments
34.—The Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997 is amended in
section 2—
(a) by the insertion, after “Moville Area” of “or the Louth
Area”, and
(b) by the substitution of “the respective meanings of those
terms in” for “the meaning of”.
35.—The Foreshore Act 1933 is amended in section 3 by the inser-
tion after subsection (1) of the following section:
“(1A) ( a) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1),
where the Minister grants a licence under that sub-section (a ‘foreshore licence’) to the Commission,such licence may, if the terms and conditions of theforeshore licence so provide, permit a person holdinga licence under Part VIA of the Foyle Fisheries Act1952 (an ‘aquaculture licence’) in respect of part orall of the area covered by the foreshore licence todo in the area specified in the aquaculture licenceconcerned any thing permitted by the aquaculturelicence as specified in the foreshore licence as beingpermitted to be done by a person holding such anaquaculture licence, subject to such terms and con-ditions as may be contained in the foreshore licence.
(b) In this section ‘Commission’ means the body referred
to in section 32 of the British-Irish Agreement Act1999.”.
47Pt.3 S.33
Amendment of
Fisheries(Amendment) Act1997.
Amendment of
Foreshore Act 1933.Section 4(2).
48[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
SCHEDULE 1
Provisions to be inserted as Schedule 3A and Schedule 3Bt o
the Act of 1952
“SCHEDULE 3A
Foyle and Carlingford Aquaculture Licensing Appeals
Board
Incorporation .
1. (1) The Appeals Board shall have the legal capacities of a
body corporate.
(2) The Appeals Board shall have the power to acquire, hold
and dispose of land or other property.
(3) The Appeals Board shall not acquire, hold or dispose of
land without the consent of the Council, the Department of Fin-ance and Personnel in Northern Ireland and the Minister forFinance.
(4) Judicial notice shall be taken of the seal of the Appeals
Board.
Membership .
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, the
remuneration, allowances and expenses of the Chairperson andother members of the Appeals Board, and any other terms andconditions on which they hold office, shall be determined by theCouncil, the Department of Finance and Personnel in NorthernIreland and the Minister for Finance.
(2) A member of the Appeals Board shall hold office for such
period as may be determined by the Council.
(3) A person may resign as a member or Chairperson of the
Appeals Board by notice in writing to the Council.
(4) The Council may dismiss a person from his office as a
member or as Chairperson of the Appeals Board, if—
(a) he fails without reasonable excuse to discharge his
functions for a continuous period of 3 months,
(b) he is convicted of an offence on indictment and is
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than3 months,
(c) he is adjudicated bankrupt,
(d) he makes a composition or arrangement with his
creditors, or
(e) in the opinion of the Council he is unable or unfit to
carry out his functions.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(5) If a member of the Appeals Board dies, resigns or is
removed from office, the Council may appoint a person to fillthe vacancy, and the person so appointed shall be appointed inthe same manner as the member who occasioned the vacancy.
(6) A person appointed under subparagraph (5) shall hold
office for such period as may be determined by the Council.
(7) Any person who is or becomes entitled under the Stand-
ing Orders of Da ´il E´ireann or Seanad E ´ireann to sit in either of
those two Houses, or who is or becomes a member of the Euro-pean Parliament, shall, while so entitled or being such member,be disqualified from membership of the Appeals Board and, ifalready a member of the Appeals Board, shall cease to be amember of the Appeals Board.
Staffing and premises .
3. (1) The Appeals Board may for the purposes of its func-
tions, with the approval of the Council—
(a) employ staff, and
(b) engage the services of such other persons as the
Appeals Board considers necessary or expedient.
(2) The Appeals Board shall, with the approval of the
Council, the Department of Finance and Personnel in NorthernIreland and the Minister for Finance, determine the remuner-ation, grading, numbers and terms and conditions of service ofstaff employed by the Board.
(3) The Appeals Board may, in the case of such of its staff as
may be determined by it with the approval of the Council, theDepartment of Finance and Personnel in Northern Ireland andthe Minister for Finance, pay such pensions, allowances or gratu-ities, or provide and maintain such pension schemes, as may beso determined.
Procedure .
4. At a meeting of the Appeals Board—
(a) the quorum shall be 5 members,
(b) the Chairperson when present shall preside,
(c) in the absence of the Chairperson the members
present shall appoint one of their number to pre-side, and
(d) every question shall be determined by a majority of
votes of the members present and, in the event of anequality of votes, the Chairperson or other memberpresiding shall have a casting vote in addition to hisor her deliberative vote.
5. The seal of the Appeals Board shall, when applied to a
document, be authenticated by the signature of the Chairpersonor other member authorised by the Appeals Board to act forthat purpose.
49Sch. 1Sch. 1
50[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
Code of conduct.
6. (1) The Appeals Board shall, as soon as practicable, draw
up a code of conduct for approval by the Council.
(2) Without prejudice to subparagraph (1), the code shall
cover the obligations of the Appeals Board to the public and theaccountability and conduct of its members and staff (includingmembership of, or employment by, other organisations, accept-ance of gifts or other benefits and the disclosure of otherinterests relevant to the work of the Appeals Board andconfidentiality).
Accounts .
7. (1) The Appeals Board shall, in such form as may be
determined by the Council, keep proper accounts and financialrecords and shall prepare a statement of accounts in respect ofeach year containing such information and in such form as theCouncil may direct.
(2) The Appeals Board shall submit copies of the statement
prepared in pursuance of subparagraph (1) to—
(a) the Council,
(b) the Comptroller and Auditor General and the
Comptroller and Auditor General for NorthernIreland who will in co-operation examine and certifythe accounts.
(3) The statement prepared under subparagraph (1) shall be
laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas.
(4) Any report concerning the Appeals Board by the
Comptroller and Auditor General and the Comptroller andAuditor General for Northern Ireland shall be laid before bothHouses of the Oireachtas.
(5) The Appeals Board shall permit officers of the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor General and the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral for Northern Ireland access to all records as may berequired to carry out the above functions.
Annual report .
8. (1) The Appeals Board shall submit a report on its activi-
ties in each year to the Council at such date and in such formas the Council may direct.
(2) A copy of the report submitted under subparagraph (1)
shall be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas.
SCHEDULE 3B
Procedure in relation to appeals
Notice of appeal .
1. (1) A notice of appeal shall—[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(a) be made in writing,
(b) state—
(i) the name and address of the appellant,(ii) the name and address of the appellant’s legal rep-
resentative, if appropriate, and
(iii) an address for service,
(c) contain—
(i) a brief statement of the facts,(ii) a summary of the principal grounds for con-
testing the decision of the Commission and thearguments supporting those grounds,
(iii) a statement of the relief sought by the appellant
and any directions sought pursuant to para-graph 14,
(iv) a schedule listing all the documents annexed to
the notice of appeal,
and
(d) be accompanied by such fee (if any) as may be
prescribed.
(2) If the appellant wishes to request confidential treatment
for any part of his appeal, he shall indicate in the notice ofappeal, or within 14 days of sending it to the Appeals Board,the relevant passages or documents, together with the reasonsfor the request, and, if so directed by the Appeals Board, supplya non-confidential version of the notice of appeal.
(3) There shall be annexed to the notice of appeal a copy of
every document on which the appellant intends to rely.
2. (1) If the Appeals Board considers that the notice of
appeal does not comply with paragraph 1, or is incomplete, oris lacking in clarity, the Appeals Board may give such directionsas may be necessary to ensure that the notice of appeal is put inorder and dealt with justly.
(2) The Appeals Board may, if satisfied that the efficient con-
duct of the proceedings so require, defer service of the notice ofappeal on the Commission until after the directions referred toin subparagraph (1) have been complied with.
3. (1) The Appeals Board may strike out a notice of appeal
at any stage in the proceedings if—
(a) having considered the grounds of appeal set out in
the notice of appeal—
(i) it considers that the notice of appeal discloses no
valid ground of appeal, or
51Sch. 1Sch. 1
52[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(ii) it is of the opinion that the appeal is vexatious,
frivolous or without substance or foundation,
or
(b) the notice of appeal does not comply with paragraph
1 in a substantial respect, and the appellant has notremedied the defect pursuant to a direction underparagraph 2(1), or
(c) the appellant fails to comply with a direction of the
Appeals Board.
(2) Where the Appeals Board strikes out a notice of appeal
it may make any consequential order it considers appropriate.
4. (1) The appellant may amend the notice of appeal only
with the permission of the Appeals Board.
(2) Where the Appeals Board grants permission under sub-
paragraph (1) it may do so on such terms as it thinks fit, andshall give such further or consequential directions as may benecessary.
(3) The Appeals Board shall not grant permission to amend
the notice of appeal in order to add a new ground for contestingthe decision unless—
(a) such ground is based on matters which have come to
light since the notice of appeal was sent to theAppeals Board, or
(b) it was not practicable to include that ground in the
notice of appeal, or
(c) the circumstances are, in the opinion of the Appeals
Board, exceptional.
Withdrawal of appeal .
5. (1) The appellant may withdraw his appeal only with the
permission of the Appeals Board.
(2) Where the Appeals Board gives permission under subpar-
agraph (1) it may—
(a) do so on such terms as it thinks fit,
(b) notify such parties to the appeal as the Appeals Board
thinks fit in such manner as it thinks fit, and
(c) publish notice of the withdrawal in such manner as
the Appeals Board thinks fit.
Response to notice of appeal .
6. On receiving a notice of appeal the Appeals Board shall—
(a) send an acknowledgement of its receipt to the appell-
ant, and[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(b) subject to paragraphs 2(2) and 3, send a copy of the
notice of appeal to the Commission.
7. (1) The Commission shall send a response to the Appeals
Board in the form required by this paragraph so that theresponse is received within six weeks, or such further time as theAppeals Board may allow, of the date on which the Commissionreceived a copy of the notice of appeal sent in accordance withparagraph 6( b).
(2) The response shall contain—
(a) a copy of the decision which is the subject of the
appeal,
(b) a succinct presentation of the arguments upon which
the Commission will rely in opposing the notice ofappeal,
(c) the relief sought by the Commission and any direc-
tions sought pursuant to paragraph 14, and
(d) a copy of the documents upon which the Commission
intends to rely and a schedule listing thosedocuments.
(3) On receiving the response, the Appeals Board shall send
a copy of the response to the appellant.
8. If the Commission wishes to request confidential treatment
for any part of its response, it shall indicate in the response, orwithin 14 days of sending it to the Appeals Board, the relevantpassages or documents, together with the reasons for therequest, and, if so directed by the Appeals Board, supply a non-confidential version of the response.
9. (1) If the Appeals Board considers that the response does
not comply with paragraph 7, or is incomplete, or is lacking inclarity, the Appeals Board may give such directions as may benecessary to ensure that the response is put in order and dealtwith justly.
(2) The Appeals Board may, if satisfied that the efficient con-
duct of the proceedings so require, defer service of the responseon the appellant until after the directions referred to in subpara-graph (1) have been complied with.
10. (1) The Appeals Board may, after hearing the parties,
strike out the response at any stage in the proceedings if—
(a) it considers that the response discloses no valid
ground of defence,
(b) the response does not comply with paragraph 7 in
a substantial respect, and the Commission has notremedied the defect pursuant to a direction underparagraph 9(1), or
(c) the Commission fails to comply with a direction of the
Appeals Board.
53Sch. 1Sch. 1
54[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(2) When the Appeals Board strikes out a response it may
make any consequential order it considers appropriate.
11. (1) The Commission may amend the response only with
the permission of the Appeals Board.
(2) Where the Appeals Board grants permission under sub-
paragraph (1) it may do so on such terms as it thinks fit, andshall give such further or consequential directions as may benecessary.
(3) The Appeals Board shall not grant permission to amend
the response in order to add a new ground for contesting thedecision unless—
(a) such ground is based on matters which have come
to light since the response was sent to the AppealsBoard, or
(b) it was not practicable to include that ground in the
response, or
(c) the circumstances are exceptional.
Consolidation, location and conduct of proceedings .
12. (1) Where two or more notices of appeal have been
received in respect of the same decision or which involve thesame or similar issues, the Appeals Board may, on the requestof a party or of its own motion, direct that the appeals or anyparticular issue or matter raised in the notices of appeal be con-solidated or heard together.
(2) Before giving a direction under this paragraph, the
Appeals Board shall invite the parties to the relevant pro-ceedings to submit their observations on the consolidation ofthe proceedings.
13. The Appeals Board may hold any meeting or hearing or
give any directions in such place as it thinks fit having regard tothe just, expeditious and economical conduct of the proceedings.
Directions and witnesses .
14. (1) The Appeals Board may at any time, on the request
of a party or of its own motion, give such directions as are pro-vided for in subparagraph (2) or such other directions as itthinks fit to secure the just, expeditious and economical conductof the proceedings.
(2) The Appeals Board may give directions—
(a) as to the manner in which the proceedings are to be
conducted and, in particular, as to whether any partof the proceedings should take the form of an oralhearing,
(b) as to any time limits to be observed, including any
time limits in respect of the conduct of any oralhearing,[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(c) for any party to file a reply to the response or other
pleadings,
(d) requiring persons to attend and give evidence or to
produce documents,
(e) as to the evidence which may be required or admitted
in proceedings before the Appeals Board and theextent to which it shall be oral or written, including,where a witness statement has been submitted,whether the witness is to be called to give oralevidence,
(f) as to the submission in advance of a hearing of any
witness statements or expert reports,
(g) as to the examination or cross-examination of
witnesses,
(h) as to the fixing of time limits with respect to any
aspect of the proceedings,
(i) as to the abridgement or extension of any time limits,
whether or not expired,
(j) for the disclosure between, or the production by, the
parties of documents or classes of documents,
(k) in relation to the inspection of any area,
(l) for the appointment and instruction of experts,
whether by the Appeals Board or by the parties andthe manner in which expert evidence is to be given,
(m) for the award of costs or expenses, including any
allowances payable to persons in connection withtheir attendance before the Appeals Board,
(n) in relation to such other matters as it thinks fit.
(3) The Appeals Board may, in particular, of its own
motion—
(a) put questions to any party to the appeal,
(b) invite any party to the appeal to make written or oral
submissions on certain aspects of the proceedings,
(c) ask any party to the appeal for information or
particulars,
(d) ask any party to the appeal to produce any documents
or papers relating to the appeal.
(4) A request by a party for directions shall be made, as far
as practicable, in the notice of appeal or response.
(5) A request for directions made otherwise than in the
notice of appeal or response shall be made in writing and shallbe—
55Sch. 1Sch. 1
56[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
(a) served by the Appeals Board on any party to the
appeal who might be affected by such directions, and
(b) determined by the Appeals Board taking into account
the observations of the parties.
15. (1) Subject to subparagraphs (2) and (3), the Appeals
Board may at any time, either of its own motion or on therequest of any party, issue a summons, requiring any person todo one or both of the following:
(a) to attend as a witness before the Appeals Board at
the time and place set out in the summons; and
(b) to answer any questions or produce any documents
or other material in his possession or under his con-trol which relate to any matter in question in the pro-ceedings.
(2) A request by a party for the issue of a summons under
this paragraph shall state—
(a) upon which facts the witness is to be questioned and
the reasons for the examination,
(b) the documents required to be produced.
(3) No person may be required to attend in compliance with
a summons under this paragraph unless—
(a) he has been given at least 7 days notice of the hear-
ing, and
(b) he is paid such sum as the Appeals Board may
determine.
(4) The Appeals Board may make the summoning of a wit-
ness on the request of a party conditional upon the deposit withthe Appeals Board of a sum determined by the Appeals Boardas sufficient to cover—
(a) the costs of the summons,
(b) the sum referred to in subparagraph (3)( b).
(5) The Appeals Board shall advance the funds necessary in
connection with the examination of any witnesses summoned bythe Appeals Board on its own motion.
(6) If any person—
(a) on being duly summoned to attend as a witness before
the Appeals Board does not attend, or
(b) being in attendance, refuses to produce any document
or other material in his possession or under his con-trol which he is lawfully required to produce or toanswer any question which he is lawfully requiredto answer,
he shall be guilty of an offence under this paragraph and shall
be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \1,500[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months, or to
both.
16. If any party fails to comply with any direction given in
accordance with this Schedule, the Appeals Board may, if it con-siders that the justice of the case so requires, order that suchparty be debarred from taking any further part in the pro-ceedings without the permission of the Appeals Board.
Oral hearing to be in public .
17. Any oral hearing shall be in public except for any part of
the hearing where the Appeals Board is satisfied that it will beconsidering information which is, in its opinion, confidentialinformation.
Decision of the Appeals Board .
18. (1) The decision of the Appeals Board shall be delivered
in such manner as may be determined by the Appeals Board.
(2) The Appeals Board shall send a copy of the decision to
each party to the appeal.”.
57Sch. 1Section 27 .
58[No. 17.] [2007.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
SCHEDULE 2
Amendments Relating to Penalties
Section Extent of Amendment
(1) (2)
35. The following subsection is substituted for subsection (1):
“(1) If any person buys, sells, exposes for sale or has in his possession
any salmon or trout unlawfully captured such person shall be guilty of anoffence against this Act and shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine (not exceeding in all \4,000) not
exceeding \1,500 together with an amount not exceeding \250 for
each salmon and \100 for each trout in respect of which the offence
was committed or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6months, or to both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding \10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or to both.”.
41. The following subsection is substituted for subsection (4):
“(4) Every person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or to both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding \10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or to both.”.
43. The following subsection is substituted for subsection (4):
“(4) ( a) Every person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) or (2) of
this section shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine notexceeding \4,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months,
or to both.
(b) Every person guilty of an offence under subsection (3A) of this section
shall be liable—
(i) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or toboth, or
(ii) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding \10,000
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, orto both.’’.
49. The following subsection is substituted for subsection (1):
“(1) Every person who at any time unlawfully takes, kills, destroys, buys,
sells, exposes for sale or has in his custody or control any unclean orunseasonable salmon or trout shall be guilty of an offence against this Actand shall be liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or to both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding \10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or to both.”.
52A. The following subsection is substituted for subsection (2):
“(2) Every person guilty of an offence under this section shall be
liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or to imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or to both, or
(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding \10,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or to both.”.[2007.] [ No. 17.] Foyle and Carlingford Fisheries Act
2007 .
Section Extent of Amendment
(1) (2)
67. The following section is substituted for section 67:
“Penalty for assaulting or obstructing authorised persons.
67.—If any person assaults, obstructs or impedes any person exercising
any power conferred by this Part, he shall be guilty of an offence againstthis Act and shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding\4,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or to both.”.
69. The following section is substituted for section 69:
“Penalties for offences.
69.—Any person who commits an offence against this Act for which a
penalty is not provided by any other provision of this Act shall be liableon summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \4,000.”.
83. The following subsection is substituted for subsection (3):
“(3) If any person—
(a) on being duly summoned to attend as a witness at an inquiry makes
default in attending, or
(b) being in attendance, refuses to take an oath which he is lawfully
required to take, or to produce any document in his power or controlwhich he is lawfully required to produce, or to answer any questionwhich he is lawfully required to answer,
he shall be guilty of an offence under this section and shall be liable on
summary conviction to a fine not exceeding \1,500.”.
59Sch. 2