————————
Number 21of2009
————————
ENFORCEMENT OF COURT ORDERS (AMENDMENT) ACT
2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Definition.
2. Amendment of Enforcement of Court Orders Act 1940.3. Short title and collective citation.
————————
12[No. 21.] [2009.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
Acts Referred to
Criminal Justice (Legal Aid) Act 1962 1962, No. 12
Enforcement of Court Orders Act 1940 1940, No. 23Enforcement of Court Orders Acts 1926 and 1940————————
Number 21of2009
————————
ENFORCEMENT OF COURT ORDERS (AMENDMENT) ACT
2009
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND THE ENFORCEMENT OF COURT
ORDERS ACT 1940.
[14th July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—In this Act “Act of 1940” means Enforcement of Court Orders
Act 1940.
2.—(1) The following sections are substituted for section 6 of the
Act of 1940:
“Failure to
comply withinstalmentorder.6.—(1) Where a debtor is liable, by virtue of an
instalment order, to pay a debt and costs either inone payment or by instalments and the debtor failsto make the payment or fails to pay any one ormore of the instalments due while that order is inforce at the time or times appointed by it, thecreditor may, at any time while it is in force orwithin 12 months after it has ceased to be in force,apply to a District Court clerk for the DistrictCourt area where the debtor resides for a sum-mons directing the debtor to appear before theDistrict Court.
(2) A summons referred to in subsection (1)
shall—
(a) be issued by the District Court clerk
concerned,
(b) contain details of the consequences,
under this section, of a failure to com-ply with an instalment order andin particular the possibility ofimprisonment,
(c) provide information in ordinary langu-
age of the options available to thejudge of the District Court under sub-section (7) at the hearing of thesummons,
3Definition.
Amendment of
Enforcement ofCourt Orders Act1940.S.2
4[No. 21.] [2009.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
(d) state that the debtor may be arrested if
he or she fails to appear before theDistrict Court as directed, and
(e) be served on the debtor by personal
service, unless the judge of the DistrictCourt directs otherwise.
(3) If a debtor fails, without reasonable excuse,
to appear before the court in answer to the sum-mons, on the application of the creditor, the judgeof the District Court, if satisfied that the debtorwas served in accordance with subsection (2),shall—
(a) issue a warrant for the arrest of the
debtor, or
(b) if the judge thinks it appropriate in all
the circumstances, fix a new date forthe hearing at which the debtor will berequired to attend and direct that heor she be notified of that date.
(4) A debtor arrested under subsection (3)( a)
shall be brought as soon as practicable before theDistrict Court.
(5) Where a debtor is arrested and brought
before the District Court under subsection (3)( a),
the judge shall fix a new date for the hearing ofthe summons and direct that the creditor beinformed by the District Court clerk by notice inwriting of the date so fixed, and shall explain tothe debtor in ordinary language—
(a) that he or she—
(i) is entitled to apply to the court for
a certificate of legal aid undersection 6A, and
(ii) must attend before the court at the
date next fixed for the hearing ofthe summons,
and
(b) the consequences, under this section,
which may follow a failure—
(i) to comply with an instalment order
and in particular the possibility ofimprisonment, or
(ii) to attend before the court as
required under paragraph ( a)(ii).
(6) At the hearing of the summons, where both
the creditor and the debtor are present in court,before hearing their evidence, the judge shallexplain to the debtor in ordinary language—[2009.] [ No. 21.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
(a) that he or she is entitled to apply to the
court for a certificate of legal aid undersection 6A, and
(b) the consequences, under this section,
which may follow a failure to complywith an instalment order, and in part-icular the possibility of imprisonment.
(7) On hearing the creditor and the debtor and
such evidence, if any, as they may respectivelyadduce, a judge may, if he or she is satisfied thatthe debtor has failed to comply with the instal-ment order—
(a) treat the proceedings on the summons
as an application under section 5 fora variation of the instalment order, inwhich case section 5 applies as if theproceedings were such an application,
(b) if he or she considers it appropriate,
request the creditor and the debtor toseek resolution by mediation, withinsuch period as the judge may specifyand, if not resolved by that method andwithin the period so specified, thecreditor may apply to the DistrictCourt clerk concerned to re-enter theproceedings,
(c) if he or she considers it appropriate, and
subject to subsection (8), make anorder fixing a term of imprisonmentfor any period not exceeding 3 months(which order shall specify the amountof the outstanding debt and costs,including the costs of that order), andpostpone the execution of that orderuntil such time and on such conditions,if any, as to the payment of the out-standing debt and costs as he or shethinks just, or
(d) if he or she considers it appropriate, and
subject to subsection (8), order thearrest and imprisonment of the debtorfor any period not exceeding 3 months(which order shall specify the amountof the outstanding debt and costs,including the costs of that order), andthe debtor shall be arrested andimprisoned accordingly.
(8) A judge shall not make an order under sub-
section (7)( c)o r( d) unless he or she is satisfied,
beyond reasonable doubt, on the evidencepresented, that the creditor has established that—
(a) the failure to pay the sum in respect of
which the debtor has made default isnot due to his or her mere inability to
5S.2S.2
6[No. 21.] [2009.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
pay but is due to his or her wilful
refusal or culpable neglect, and
(b) the debtor has no goods which could be
taken in execution under any processof the court by which the judgment,order or decree for the debt was given.
(9) Where an order fixing and postponing a
term of imprisonment has been made under sub-section (7)( c) with a condition as to payment of
the debt and costs by the debtor, he or she may, ifhis or her ability to comply with the terms of theorder has changed, apply to the District Courtclerk concerned to re-enter the matter and theDistrict Court judge, on notice to the creditor,shall deal with the matter as if it was an appli-cation under section 5 for a variation of an instal-ment order.
(10) Where a debtor is imprisoned on foot of
an order made under subsection (7)( c)o r( d), he
or she—
(a) may, if his or her ability to re-pay the
outstanding debt and costs as specifiedin that order has changed, apply to theDistrict Court clerk concerned to re-enter the matter and the District Courtjudge, on notice to the creditor, shalldeal with the matter as if it was a re-hearing of the summons referred to insubsection (1), and
(b) is entitled to be released immediately
upon payment by him or her or on hisor her behalf to the District Courtclerk concerned or to the Governor ofthe Prison for the District Court clerk,of the sum of money consisting of theamount of all instalments of the debtand costs which have accrued before,and are unpaid at the date of suchorder.
(11) All moneys paid under this section to the
District Court clerk (whether directly or throughthe Governor of the Prison) by or on behalf of adebtor shall be paid by the clerk to the creditoron request.
(12) Failure by a debtor to comply with subsec-
tion (5)( a)(ii), without reasonable excuse, consti-
tutes contempt of court, and the District Courtjudge may deal with the matter accordingly.
Entitlement to
legal aid.6A.—(1) If it appears to a judge of the District
Court in proceedings on a summons under section6 that the means of a debtor are insufficient toenable him or her to obtain legal aid, the judgeshall, on application being made by the debtor inthat behalf, grant to the debtor—[2009.] [ No. 21.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
(a) a certificate for free legal aid (in this
section referred to as a ‘debtor’s legalaid certificate’),
(b) where the debtor appeals an order for
his or her imprisonment made undersection (7)( c)o r( d) and applies to the
judge for legal aid in connection withthe appeal, a certificate for free legalaid in respect of the appeal (in thissection referred to as a ‘debtor’s legalaid (appeal) certificate’), or
(c) where the judge refers a question of law
arising in the proceedings to the HighCourt by way of case stated or states acase in relation to the proceedings forthe opinion of the High Court and thedebtor applies to the judge for legal aidin connection with that reference orcase stated, a certificate for free legalaid in respect of the reference or casestated (in this section referred to as a‘debtor’s legal aid (case stated)certificate’).
(2) ( a) Where a certificate has been granted
under subsection (1) the debtor con-cerned shall be entitled to legal aid andto have legal representation assignedto him or her for that purpose.
(b) Where a debtor, in respect of whom an
order for imprisonment is made, isrefused a debtor’s legal aid (appeal)certificate, he or she may apply for thecertificate to the court to which anappeal from imprisonment lieseither—
(i) by letter addressed to the registrar
of that court setting out the factsof the case and the grounds of theapplication, or
(ii) to the court itself.
(3) The Criminal Justice (Legal Aid) Act 1962
and regulations made under section 10 of that Actshall, where appropriate and with such modifi-cations as may be necessary, apply to a certificategranted under subsection (1) and to such legal aid.
(4) The Minister may make regulations as are
necessary for the purpose of this section to pre-scribe all or any of the following:
(a) the form of debtor’s legal aid cer-
tificates,
(b) the rate of payment of any fee, costs or
other expenses payable,
7S.2S.2
8[No. 21.] [2009.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
(c) the manner in which legal representa-
tives may be assigned pursuant to suchcertificates, or
(d) anything that by this Act is required or
permitted to be prescribed.”.
(2) Section 8 of the Act of 1940 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1) by substituting “treat the application as
an application for a summons under section 6, in whichcase section 6 applies as if the application was madeunder it” for “unless the defaulter shows, to the satis-faction of such Justice, that the failure to pay was dueneither to his wilful refusal nor to his culpable neglect,sentence the defaulter to imprisonment for any term notexceeding three months”,
(b) in subsection (2)( d) by substituting “shall treat the failure
to discharge the amount as a failure to appear before thecourt in answer to a summons issued under section 6(2),in which case section 6 applies accordingly” for “may,unless the defaulter shows to the satisfaction of suchJustice that the failure to discharge the said amount wasdue neither to his wilful refusal nor to his culpable neg-lect, sentence the defaulter to imprisonment for any termnot exceeding three months”, and
(c) in subsections (3) and (5) by substituting “section 6 for
failing to pay the sum or sums due under an orderreferred to in subsection (1)” for “this section”.
(3) The following section is substituted for section 9 of the Act
of 1940:
“Release of
personimprisoned fornon-paymentof money.9.—(1) Where a person is in prison under an
order of a court made on account of the failure ofthe person to pay a sum of money, the Ministermay, at any time and for any reason which appearsto him or her sufficient, direct that the person bereleased either (as the Minister thinks proper)immediately or after payment of a specified partof that sum of money.
(2) The Minister may, before releasing a person
under this section, if he or she considers it appro-priate and proper in all the circumstances consultwith the judge who made the order for imprison-ment of the person.
(3) Where the Minister directs that a person be
released from prison, the person shall be releasedin accordance with the direction.
(4) In this section ‘Minister’ means Minister for
Justice, Equality and Law Reform.”.[2009.] [ No. 21.] Enforcement of Court Orders
(Amendment) Act 2009 .
3.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Enforcement of Court
Orders (Amendment) Act 2009.
(2) The Enforcement of Court Orders Acts 1926 and 1940 and
this Act may be cited together as the Enforcement of Court OrdersActs 1926 to 2009.
9Short title and
collective citation.