————————
Number 14of2007
————————
ELECTORAL (AMENDMENT) ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Amendment of Electoral Act 1992.
2. Amendment of Electoral Act 1997.3. Short title, collective citation and construction.
————————
12[No. 14.] [2007.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Electoral Act 1992 1992, No. 23
Electoral Act 1997 1997, No. 25Electoral Acts 1992 to 2006Statutory Declarations Act 1938 1938, No. 37Succession Act 1965 1965, No. 27————————
Number 14of2007
————————
ELECTORAL (AMENDMENT) ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO AMEND THE ELECTORAL ACT 1992 AND THE
ELECTORAL ACT 1997 AND TO PROVIDE FORRELATED MATTERS.
[10th April , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—The Electoral Act 1992 is amended—
(a) by substituting for sections 44 to 52 the following:
“Notice of
election.44.—The returning officer shall, within 2
days (disregarding any excluded day) afterthe day on which he receives the writ, givepublic notice in the form directed by theMinister (in this Act referred to as the‘notice of election’) stating—
(a) the times for receiving
nominations,
(b) the requirement on candidates
referred to in section 46(5) tosecure 30 assents or make adeposit in accordance with thisPart,
(c) the times and place at which
nomination papers may beobtained,
(d) the times and place at which he
will attend to receive nomi-nations, and
(e) the day and the period fixed for
the holding of the poll if theelection is contested.
Necessity for
nomination.45.—A person shall not be entitled to
have his name inserted in a ballot paper asa candidate at a Da ´il election unless he has
been nominated in the manner provided bythis Act and his nomination paper has beenruled as valid by the returning officer.
3Amendment of
Electoral Act 1992.S.1
4[No. 14.] [2007.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Nomination of
candidates.46.—(1) At a Da ´il election a person may
nominate himself as a candidate or may,with his consent, be nominated by anotherperson (being a person registered as a Da ´il
elector in the constituency for which heproposes to nominate the candidate) asproposer.
(2) Each candidate shall be nominated
by a separate nomination paper in the formprescribed by regulations made by theMinister. The form of nomination papermay include—
(a) a note of the qualifications, dis-
qualifications and incapacitiesas regards election to and mem-bership of the Da ´il,
(b) a note of the provisions that
apply under this Part to thenomination of a candidatereferred to in subsection (5),including—
(i) the procedure for assenting
under subsections (5)( a)
and (6),
(ii) the making of a deposit
under section 47, and
(iii) the fact a candidate referred
to in subsection (5) mayeither follow the foregoingprocedure for assenting ormake a deposit undersection 47,
and
(c) a form of declaration, to be
signed by the candidate or hisproposer, that he has read thenote referred to in paragraph(a) and believes the candidate
to be eligible for election andthat the candidate has con-sented to the nomination.
(3) Each nomination paper shall state
the names (the surname being stated first)and the address and occupation (if any) ofthe candidate.
(4) A candidate may include in his nomi-
nation paper the name of the political partyregistered in the Register of Political Par-ties as a party organised to contest a Da ´il
election of which he is a candidate, pro-vided that, at the time the nominationpaper is delivered to the returning officer,a certificate in the form directed by the[2007.] [ No. 14.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
Minister (in this Act referred to as a ‘certifi-
cate of political affiliation’) authenticatingthe candidature is produced to thereturning officer, being a certificate signedby the officer or officers of such partywhose name or names appear in the saidRegister pursuant to section 25(7)( d).
Where such a certificate is produced, thereturning officer, provided he is satisfiedthat it is appropriate to do so in relation tothe candidate, shall cause—
(a) a statement of the name of the
relevant political party and acopy of the political party’semblem as registered in theRegister of Political Parties tobe specified in relation to thecandidate on all the ballot pap-ers, and
(b) a statement of the name of the
relevant political party to bespecified in relation to the can-didate on notices.
(5) In the case of a candidate whose
candidature is not authenticated by a cer-tificate of political affiliation under subsec-tion (4), one or other of the following para-graphs shall, before the expiration of thetime appointed by this Act for receivingnominations, be complied with:
(a) the candidate’s nomination shall
have been assented to by 30persons (excluding the candi-date and any proposer) who areregistered as Da ´il electors in the
constituency (each of whom inthis Part is referred to as an‘assentor’);
(b) the candidate, or someone on his
behalf, shall have made adeposit in accordance withsection 47.
(6) The following provisions apply in
respect of the assents required by subsec-tion (5)( a) to the nomination of a candidate
referred to in that subsection:
(a) to assent to the nomination, an
assentor shall make a statutorydeclaration in the prescribedform stating the following:
(i) his number (including pol-
ling district letters) on theregister of Da ´il electors in
force on the date of the
5S.1S.1
6[No. 14.] [2007.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
making of the statutory
declaration;
(ii) his place of ordinary resi-
dence in respect of whichhe is registered in the regis-ter of Da ´il electors referred
to in subparagraph (i);
(iii) his contact details, including
telephone numbers (ifany);
(iv) the name of the Da ´il con-
stituency, on the date ofthe making of the statutorydeclaration, in which he isordinarily resident;
(v) the name and address of
the candidate;
(vi) the form of identification
produced by him in accord-ance with paragraph ( b),
including any number on itthat distinguishes it fromsimilar forms held byothers;
(vii) that he assents to the nomi-
nation of the candidate;
(viii) that he has not assented to
the nomination of anyother candidate in respectof that Da ´il election;
(b) when making the statutory dec-
laration referred to in para-graph ( a), the assentor shall
produce to the person takingand receiving the declaration aprescribed photographic identi-fication and shall, on so doing,be deemed, for the purposes ofthe Statutory Declarations Act1938, to be personally known tothe person taking and receivingthe declaration;
(c) the assent shall have effect as
respects, and only as respects,the Da ´il constituency in which
the place referred to in para-graph ( a)(ii) is situate at the
time of the Da ´il election
concerned;[2007.] [ No. 14.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(d) subject to paragraph ( e), the
assent shall have effect asrespects, and only as respects,the Da ´il election in the constitu-
ency referred to in paragraph(c) held next after the making
of the statutory declaration;
(e) notwithstanding paragraph ( d),
the assent shall cease to haveeffect if the register of Da ´il elec-
tors referred to in paragraph ( a)
ceases to be in force before theholding of the Da ´il election
referred to in paragraph ( d);
(f) the candidate or proposer shall
attach the required number ofstatutory declarations (that is tosay, the 30 statutory declar-ations constituting the assents)to the nomination paper and thenomination paper delivered tothe returning officer in accord-ance with section 50 shall havethe declarations so attached;
(g) where more than the required
number of statutory declar-ations is attached to the nomi-nation paper, the declarations(up to the required number)
first attached to the nominationpaper shall be taken intoaccount to the exclusion of anyothers;
(h) it shall be lawful for a member of
the Garda Sı ´ocha´na or an
official of the registration auth-ority to take and receive a statu-tory declaration referred to inparagraph ( a) and any such dec-
laration shall be stamped by themember or official concerned;
(i) a registration authority and a
returning officer shall arrangefor the provision of forms forthe purposes of making a statu-tory declaration referred to inparagraph ( a) free of charge to
any person who requests such aform.
(7) For the purposes of subsections
(5)(a) and (6), a person whose application
to have his name entered in a supplementto the register of Da ´il electors is approved
by the registration authority at or beforethe latest time for delivery of a nominationpaper to the returning officer shall be
7S.1S.1
8[No. 14.] [2007.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
deemed to be registered as a Da ´il elector in
the applicable constituency.
(8) Where a candidate is not the candi-
date of a political party registered in theRegister of Political Parties as a partyorganised to contest a Da ´il election he shall
be entitled to enter after his name on thenomination paper the expression ‘Non-Party’ and, if he does so, the returningofficer shall cause a statement of thatexpression to be specified in relation to thecandidate on all the ballot papers and onnotices.
(9) The returning officer shall provide
nomination papers during the usual officehours, at such place or places as are namedin the notice of election, on each week-dayduring the period beginning on the publi-cation of that notice and ending at 12 noonon the latest date for receiving nominationsand he shall supply a nomination paper orpapers free of charge to any person apply-ing therefor, but the use of a paper suppliedby the returning officer pursuant to thissection shall not be obligatory at a Da ´il
election, provided that the nominationpaper used at the election is in the pre-scribed form.
(10) Every reference in this section to
the Register of Political Parties shall beconstrued as a reference to the copy of thatRegister sent to the returning officer pursu-ant to section 25C(7).
Deposit by
certaincandidates.47.—(1) This section applies to a candi-
date referred to in section 46(5) unless thecandidate concerned has opted to have his
nomination assented to by the means speci-fied in section 46(5)( a) and (6).
(2) A candidate at a Da ´il election
referred to in section 46(5), or someone onhis behalf, may, before the expiration of thetime appointed by this Act for receivingnominations, deposit with the returningofficer the sum of \500, and if he fails to do
so, his candidature shall be deemed to havebeen withdrawn.
(3) The deposit that may be made by or
on behalf of a candidate pursuant to thissection may be made by means of legaltender or, with the consent of the returningofficer, in any other manner.
Return or
disposal ofdeposit.48.—(1) The deposit referred to in
section 47 shall be returned where thecandidate—[2007.] [ No. 14.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(a) withdraws his candidature in
accordance with section 54,
(b) dies before the poll is closed,
(c) has not, before the expiration of
the time for the receipt of nomi-nations, been validly nominatedas a candidate,
(d) is elected, or
(e) is not elected but the greatest
number of votes credited to himat any stage of the counting ofvotes at the election exceeds—
(i) in the case of a general elec-
tion, one quarter of thequota, or
(ii) in the case of a bye-election,
one quarter of what wouldhave been the quota in thatconstituency were the fullnumber of members of theDa´il for the existing con-
stituency to be elected.
(2) Any deposit which is not returned
under the foregoing subsection shall beforfeited.
(3) Where a deposit is to be returned
under subsection (1) it shall be returned tothe person by whom it was made, providedthat a deposit made by a person who diesbefore the deposit is returned shall bereturned to his personal representative.
(4) A deposit forfeited under this
section shall be disposed of by the returningofficer in such manner as may be directedby the Minister for Finance.
(5) In this section ‘personal representa-
tive’ has the meaning assigned to it bysection 3 of the Succession Act 1965.
Times for
receivingnominations.49.—The earliest time for receiving
nominations shall be 10 a.m. on the day(disregarding any excluded day) next fol-lowing the latest date for the publication ofthe notice of election and the latest time forreceiving nominations shall be 12 noon onthe 7th day (disregarding any excluded day)next following the day on which the writ orwrits for the election is or are issued.
Delivery of
nominationpapers.50.—(1) Every nomination paper shall
be delivered to the returning officer withinthe times specified in section 49, by the can-didate or his proposer.
9S.1S.1
10[No. 14.] [2007.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(2) The delivery of the nomination
paper shall be made by the candidate inperson except that, where the candidate isproposed by another person, it may bemade either as aforesaid or by the proposerin person.
(3) The returning officer shall attend to
receive nominations at the place specifiedin that behalf in the notice of electionbetween the hours of 10 a.m. and 12 noonand between the hours of 2 p.m. and 5 p.m.on the day (disregarding any excluded day)before the latest date for receiving nomi-nations and between the hours of 10 a.m.and 12 noon on the said latest date.
Selection of
nominationpapers.51.—The returning officer shall number
the nomination papers in the order in whichthey are received by him, and the first validnomination paper nominating a candidatefor election shall be deemed to be thenomination of that candidate for that con-stituency.
Ruling on
validity ofnominationpapers.52.—(1) ( a) The returning officer shall
rule on the validity of eachnomination paper within onehour after its delivery to himand may rule that it is invalid if,but only if, he considers that thepaper is not properly made outor signed.
(b) Without prejudice to paragraph
(a), the returning officer may
also rule that the nominationpaper of a candidate referred toin paragraph ( a) of section 46(5)
is invalid if he considers that theprovisions of subsections (5)( a)
and (6) of that section have notbeen complied with.
(c) The returning officer shall not
rule that a nomination paper isinvalid because an assentor hasassented to the nomination ofmore than one candidate at thesame Da ´il election.
(2) The candidate nominated by each
nomination paper and his proposer, if any,and one other person designated by thecandidate or his proposer, as the case maybe, and no other person, except with thepermission of the returning officer, shall beentitled to attend while the said nominationpaper is being ruled upon by the returningofficer.[2007.] [ No. 14.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(3) The returning officer shall object to
the name of a candidate in a nominationpaper if such name—
(a) is not a name by which the candi-
date is commonly known,
(b) is misleading and likely to cause
confusion,
(c) is unduly long, or
(d) contains a political reference,
and where the returning officer so objects,
he shall allow the candidate or his proposer,as may be appropriate, to amend the nameand, if it is not so amended to the returningofficer’s satisfaction, the returning officermay amend it, as he thinks fit, after consul-tation with the candidate or his proposer, ifeither is present, or may rule that the nomi-nation paper is invalid as not being prop-erly made out.
(4) The returning officer shall object to
the description of a candidate in a nomi-nation paper which is, in the opinion of thereturning officer, incorrect, insufficient toidentify the candidate or unnecessarily longor which contains a political reference otherthan, where appropriate, a reference to apublic or elected office held, or formerlyheld, by the candidate or an entry madepursuant to subsection (4) or (8) of section46. Where the returning officer so objects,he shall allow the candidate or his proposer,as may be appropriate, to amend thedescription and, if it is not so amended tothe returning officer’s satisfaction, thereturning officer may amend or delete it,as he thinks fit, after consultation with thecandidate or his proposer, if either ispresent, or may rule that the nominationpaper is invalid as not being properlymade out.
(5) When the returning officer has ruled
on the validity of a nomination paper, heshall put a note of his decision on the nomi-
nation paper and shall sign the note. If herules that the paper is invalid, he shallinclude a statement of his reasons. Hisdecision under this section shall be final,subject only to reversal on a petition ques-tioning the election.
(6) As soon as practicable after ruling on
the validity of a nomination paper, thereturning officer shall give, by post orotherwise, notice in writing of his ruling tothe candidate.
11S.1S.1
Amendment of
Electoral Act 1997.
Short title,
collective citationand construction.
12[No. 14.] [2007.] Electoral (Amendment) Act 2007 .
(7) Every person in respect of whom a
nomination paper has, under this section,been determined to be valid and whosecandidature is not withdrawn in accordancewith section 54 or is not deemed undersection 47(2) or 62(1) to have been with-drawn shall stand validly nominated as acandidate.”,
and
(b) in section 124(3), by inserting “or section 48(1)( e)” after
“section 21(1)( a) of the Electoral Act, 1997”.
2.—The Schedule to the Electoral Act 1997 is amended by substi-
tuting for subparagraph ( d) of paragraph 2 the following:
“(d) necessary travelling and other expenses incurred by a
candidate or an assentor in meeting the require-ments of subsections (5)( a) and (6) of section 46 of
the Act of 1992 and subsections (1A) and (1B) ofsection 12 of the Act of 1997,
(dd) the payment by or on behalf of a candidate of a
deposit under section 47 of the Act of 1992,”.
3.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Electoral (Amendment)
Act 2007.
(2) The Electoral Acts 1992 to 2006 and this Act may be cited
together as the Electoral Acts 1992 to 2007 and shall be construedtogether as one.