————————
Number 31of2007
————————
FINANCE (NO. 2) ACT 2007
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
1. Amendment of section 92B (residential property first time
purchaser relief) of Stamp Duties Consolidation Act1999.
2. Short title and construction.
————————
12[No. 31.] [2007.] Finance (No. 2)A c t 2007 .
Acts Referred to
Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999 1999, No. 31————————
Number 31of2007
————————
FINANCE (NO. 2) ACT 2007
————————
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE
STAMP DUTIES CONSOLIDATION ACT 1999.
[9th July , 2007]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
1.—(1) Section 92B of the Stamp Duties Consolidation Act 1999
is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for subsection (2):
“(2) Stamp duty shall not be chargeable under or by
reference to paragraphs (2) to (6A) of the Heading ‘CON-VEYANCE or TRANSFER on sale of any property otherthan stocks or marketable securities or a policy ofinsurance or a policy of life insurance’ or clauses (ii) to(vii) of paragraph (3)( a) of the Heading ‘LEASE’, as the
case may be, in Schedule 1 on any instrument to whichthis section applies.”,
(b) in subsection (3)—
(i) in paragraph ( a) by substituting “first time pur-
chaser,” for “first time purchaser, or”,
(ii) in paragraph ( b) by substituting “during that period,
and” for “during that period.”,
and
(iii) by inserting the following after paragraph ( b):
“(c) any instrument, executed on or after 31
March 2007 and on or before the date ofthe passing of the Finance (No. 2) Act
2007 , that does not contain such a state-
ment as is referred to in paragraph ( a)o r
(b)—
3Amendment of
section 92B(residentialproperty first timepurchaser relief) ofStamp DutiesConsolidation Act1999.S.1
4[No. 31.] [2007.] Finance (No. 2)A c t 2007 .
(i) where—
(I) section 92 applies to that instru-
ment, and
(II) the purchaser has complied with,
and has undertaken to continueto be bound by, the conditions,liabilities and obligations undersection 92 and has satisfied, or, asthe case may be, undertaken tobe bound by, the conditions(including the condition set outin such a statement as is referredto in paragraph ( a) notwithstand-
ing that the said instrument doesnot contain such a statement),liabilities and obligationsreferred to in this section,
or
(ii) where—
(I) had that instrument contained a
statement such as is referred toin paragraph ( b), such statement
would have been true and cor-rect, and
(II) the purchaser has satisfied, or, as
the case may be, undertaken tobe bound by, the conditions(including the conditions set outin such a statement as is referredto in paragraph ( b) notwithstand-
ing that the said instrument doesnot contain such a statement),liabilities and obligationsreferred to in this section.”,
(c) in subsection (4)( a) by deleting “the difference between”
and “and the amount of duty which was actuallycharged”,
and
(d) by inserting the following after subsection (8):
“(9) Where, by virtue of the amendment of this section
by the Finance (No. 2) Act 2007 , an instrument is one in
respect of which stamp duty is not chargeable under or byreference to any of the paragraphs or, as the case may be,clauses referred to in subsection (2), the Commissioners,on a claim being made to them in that behalf and on theconditions set out in subsection (10) being satisfied, shallcancel and repay such duty paid as would not have beencharged had this section been so amended before theinstrument was executed.
(10) The conditions required by this subsection are that
the purchaser (in this subsection referred to as the[2007.] [ No. 31.] Finance (No. 2)A c t 2007 .
‘claimant’), when making a claim for repayment, shall
produce to the Commissioners—
(a) the stamped instrument,
(b) a declaration made in writing by the claimant, in
such form as the Commissioners may specify,confirming to the satisfaction of the Commis-sioners that—
(i) where the instrument is one to which this
section applies by virtue of paragraph ( a)
or (b) of subsection (3), the claimant has
complied with the conditions, liabilitiesand obligations under either or both thissection and section 92, as the case may be,and has undertaken to continue to bebound by those conditions, liabilities andobligations,
(ii) where the instrument is one to which sub-
section (3)( c)(i) applies, the claimant has
complied with, and has undertaken to con-tinue to be bound by, the conditions, liab-ilities and obligations under section 92 andhas satisfied, or, as the case may be,undertaken to be bound by, the conditions(including the condition set out in such astatement as is referred to in paragraph(a) of that subsection notwithstanding that
the said instrument does not contain sucha statement), liabilities and obligationsreferred to in this section, or
(iii) where the instrument is one to which sub-
section (3)( c)(ii) applies, the claimant has
satisfied, or, as the case may be, under-taken to be bound by, the conditions(including the conditions set out in such astatement as is referred to in paragraph(b) of that subsection notwithstanding that
the said instrument does not contain sucha statement), liabilities and obligationsreferred to in this section,
and
(c) such information as the Commissioners may
reasonably require for the purposes of thissubsection.
(11) A reference in subsection (3)( c) or subsection (10)
to the purchaser, shall be construed as including a refer-ence, where there is more than one purchaser, to each andevery one of the purchasers.”.
(2) This section applies as respects instruments executed on or
after 31 March 2007.
5S.1Short title and
construction.
6[No. 31.] [2007.] Finance (No. 2)A c t 2007 .
2.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Finance (No. 2) Act 2007.
(2) This Act shall be construed together with the Stamp Duties
Consolidation Act 1999 and the enactments amending or extendingthat Act.