————————
Number 32of2009
————————
CRIMINAL JUSTICE (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Section
1. Short title.2. Definitions.
PART 2
Organised Crime
3. Amendment of section 70 of Act of 2006 – definition of “cri-
minal organisation”, etc.
4. Amendment of section 71 of Act of 2006.5. Directing activities of a criminal organisation.6. Organised crime: offence to participate in, or contribute to,
certain activities.
7. Evidential provisions as to proof of criminal organisation’s
existence.
8. Certain offences under Part 7 of Act of 2006 to be sched-
uled offences.
9. New section 72A of Act of 2006.
10. Amendment of section 73 of Act of 2006.11. Amendment of section 74 of Act of 2006.12. New section 74A of Act of 2006.13. New section 74B of Act of 2006.14. New section 26A of Act of 2007 and amendment of Schedule
2 to that Act.
15. Amendment of Bail Act 1997.16. Increase of penalty for intimidation of witnesses, jurors, etc.
1Click here for
Explanatory Memorandum2[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
17. Amendment of Criminal Procedure Act 1967.
PART 3
Offences under certain enactments: provision for extra-
territorial effect
18. Amendment of section 7 of Act of 1939.19. Amendment of sections 7 and 8 of Act of 1997.20. Amendment of section 41 (substantive elements of offence)
of Act of 1999.
PART 4
Amendments concerning detention and re-arrest powers
21. Amendment of sections 30 and 30A of Act of 1939.22. Amendment of sections 2, 4, 5 and 11 of Act of 1996.23. Amendment of sections 50, 51 and 52 of Act of 2007.24. Amendment of sections 4, 9 and 10 of Act of 1984.
PART 5
Miscellaneous
25. Directing activities of an unlawful organisation.26. Search warrant applications to be heard otherwise than in
public.
————————
Acts Referred to
Bail Act 1997 1997, No. 16
Companies ActsCopyright and Related Rights Act 2000 2000, No. 28Criminal Justice (Drug Trafficking) Act 1996 1996, No. 29Criminal Justice Act 1984 1984, No. 22Criminal Justice Act 1999 1999, No. 10Criminal Justice Act 2006 2006, No. 26Criminal Justice Act 2007 2007, No. 29Criminal Law Act 1997 1997, No. 14Criminal Procedure Act 1967 1967, No. 12Finance Act 1992 1992, No. 9Firearms Act 1925 1925, No. 17Firearms and Offensive Weapons Act 1990 1990, No. 12Mercantile Marine Act 1955 1955, No. 29Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 1977, No. 12Offences against the State (Amendment) Act 1998 1998, No. 39Offences against the State Act 1939 1939, No. 13————————
Number 32of2009
————————
CRIMINAL JUSTICE (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
AN ACT—
(a) TO PROVIDE FOR ADDITIONAL MEASURES WITH
RESPECT TO COMBATING ORGANISED CRIMEAND, IN PARTICULAR, WITH RESPECT TO COUN-TERING THE INCREASED LEVELS OF VIOLENCETOWARDS, AND INTIMIDATION OF, MEMBERS OFTHE PUBLIC PERPETRATED BY CRIMINALORGANISATIONS AND SECURING CONDITIONS INWHICH OFFENCES COMMITTED BY THOSEASSOCIATED WITH SUCH ORGANISATIONS CAN,IN DUE COURSE OF LAW, BE INVESTIGATED ANDPROSECUTED AND, FOR THAT PURPOSE, TOAMEND PART 7 OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT2006 AND CERTAIN OTHER ENACTMENTS;
(b) TO AMEND THE LAW IN RELATION TO THE
INVESTIGATION OF OFFENCES, INCLUDING INRELATION TO THE DETENTION OF SUSPECTSAND THEIR RE-ARREST IN CERTAIN CIRCUM-STANCES, AND TO OTHERWISE AMEND CRIMI-NAL LAW AND PROCEDURE; AND
(c) TO PROVIDE FOR RELATED MATTERS.
[23rd July , 2009]
BE IT ENACTED BY THE OIREACHTAS AS FOLLOWS:
PART 1
Preliminary and General
1.—This Act may be cited as the Criminal Justice (Amendment)
Act 2009.
2.—In this Act—
“Act of 1939” means the Offences against the State Act 1939;“Act of 1984” means the Criminal Justice Act 1984;
3
Short title.
Definitions.Pt.1 S.2
Amendment of
section 70 of Act of2006 – definition of“criminalorganisation”, etc.
Amendment of
section 71 of Act of2006.
4[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
“Act of 1996” means the Criminal Justice (Drug Trafficking) Act
1996;
“Act of 1997” means the Criminal Law Act 1997;“Act of 1999” means the Criminal Justice Act 1999;“Act of 2006” means the Criminal Justice Act 2006;“Act of 2007” means the Criminal Justice Act 2007.
PART 2
Organised Crime
3.—(1) Section 70(1) of the Act of 2006 is amended—
(a) by substituting the following for the definition of “crimi-
nal organisation”:
“‘criminal organisation’ means a structured group,
however organised, that has as its main purpose or activitythe commission or facilitation of a serious offence;”,
and
(b) by substituting the following for the definition of “struc-
tured group”:
“ ‘structured group’ means a group of 3 or more persons,
which is not randomly formed for the immediate com-mission of a single offence, and the involvement in whichby 2 or more of those persons is with a view to their actingin concert; for the avoidance of doubt, a structured groupmay exist notwithstanding the absence of all or any ofthe following:
(a) formal rules or formal membership, or any for-
mal roles for those involved in the group;
(b) any hierarchical or leadership structure;
(c) continuity of involvement by persons in the
group.”.
(2) Section 70 of the Act of 2006 is further amended by adding
the following subsection:
“(3) For the purposes of the references in sections 71(2)( d)
and 74(1)( b)(i) to a person’s being ordinarily resident in the
State, a person shall be taken to be so resident, on the date ofthe commission of the offence to which section 71(1) or 74(1),as the case may be, applies, if, for the 12 months immediatelypreceding that date, the person has his or her principal place ofresidence in the State.”.
4.—Section 71 of the Act of 2006 is amended—
(a) in subsection (2)( d), by substituting “person ordinarily
resident in the State” for “stateless person habitually resi-dent in the State”, and[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) by deleting subsection (5).
5.—The Act of 2006 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 71:
“Offence of
directing acriminalorganisation.71A.—(1) In this section—
(a) ‘directs’, in relation to activities,
means—
(i) controls or supervises the activi-
ties, or
(ii) gives an order, instruction or guid-
ance, or makes a request, withrespect to the carrying on of theactivities;
(b) references to activities include refer-
ences to—
(i) activities carried on outside the
State, and
(ii) activities that do not constitute an
offence or offences.
(2) A person who directs, at any level of the
organisation’s structure, the activities of a criminalorganisation is guilty of an offence and shall beliable on conviction on indictment to imprison-ment for life or a lesser term of imprisonment.
(3) Any statement made orally, in writing or
otherwise, or any conduct, by the defendantimplying or leading to a reasonable inference thathe or she was at a material time directing theactivities of a criminal organisation shall, in pro-ceedings for an offence under this section, beadmissible as evidence that the defendant wasdoing such at that time.
(4) In proceedings under this section, the court
or the jury, as the case may be, in determiningwhether an offence under this section has beencommitted, may, in addition to any other relevantevidence, also consider—
(a) any evidence of a pattern of behaviour
on the part of the defendant consistentwith his or her having directed theactivities of the organisation concernedat the material time, and
(b) without limiting paragraph ( a) or sub-
section (3)—
(i) whether the defendant has received
any benefit from the organisationconcerned, and
5Pt.2 S.4
Directing activities
of a criminalorganisation.Pt.2 S.5
Organised crime:
offence toparticipate in, orcontribute to,certain activities.
6[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(ii) evidence as to the possession by the
defendant of such articles or docu-ments or other records as wouldgive rise to a reasonable suspicionthat such articles, documents orother records were in his or herpossession or control for a pur-pose connected with directing theactivities of the organisationconcerned.
(5) Any document or other record emanating
or purporting to emanate from the organisationconcerned from which there can be inferred—
(a) either—
(i) the giving, at the time concerned,
of an instruction, order or guid-ance by the defendant to any per-son involved in the organisation,or
(ii) the making, at that time, by the
defendant of a request of a personso involved,
or
(b) the seeking, at that time, by a person so
involved of assistance or guidancefrom the defendant,
shall, in proceedings for an offence under this
section, be admissible as evidence that the defend-ant was directing the activities of the organisationconcerned at the material time.
(6) In this section ‘document or other record’
has the same meaning as it has in section 71B.”.
6.—The Act of 2006 is amended by substituting the following
section for section 72:
“Offence to
participate in,or contributeto, certainactivities.72.—(1) A person is guilty of an offence if, with
knowledge of the existence of the organisationreferred to in this subsection, the person partici-pates in or contributes to any activity (whetherconstituting an offence or not)—
(a) intending either to—
(i) enhance the ability of a criminal
organisation or any of its membersto commit, or
(ii) facilitate the commission by a
criminal organisation or any of itsmembers of,
a serious offence, or[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) being reckless as to whether such par-
ticipation or contribution couldeither—
(i) enhance the ability of a criminal
organisation or any of its membersto commit, or
(ii) facilitate the commission by a
criminal organisation or any of itsmembers of,
a serious offence.
(2) A person guilty of an offence under this
section shall be liable on conviction on indictmentto a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding15 years or both.
(3) The reference in subsection (1) to the com-
mission of a serious offence includes a referenceto the doing of an act in a place outside the Statethat constitutes a serious offence under the law ofthat place and which act would, if done in theState, constitute a serious offence.
(4) In proceedings for an offence under this
section it shall not be necessary for the pros-ecution to prove—
(a) that the criminal organisation con-
cerned or any of its members actuallycommitted, as the case may be—
(i) a serious offence in the State, or
(ii) a serious offence under the law of
a place outside the State wherethe act constituting the offencewould, if done in the State, consti-tute a serious offence,
(b) that the participation or contribution of
the defendant actually—
(i) enhanced the ability of the criminal
organisation concerned or any ofits members to commit, or
(ii) facilitated the commission by it or
any of its members of,
a serious offence, or
(c) knowledge on the part of the defendant
of the specific nature of any offencereferred to in subsection (1)( a)o r( b).
(5) In determining whether a person partici-
pates in or contributes to an activity referred to insubsection (1), the court may consider, inter alia,whether the person—
7Pt.2 S.6Pt.2 S.6
8[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(a) uses a name, word, symbol or other rep-
resentation that identifies, or is associ-ated with, the criminal organisationconcerned, or
(b) receives any benefit from the criminal
organisation concerned.
(6) In proceedings for an offence under this
section, it shall be presumed, until the contrary isshown, that the participation or contribution (the‘relevant act’) of the defendant referred to in sub-section (1) was engaged in or made with the stateof mind on the defendant’s part referred to inparagraph ( a)o r( b) of that subsection if the cir-
cumstances under which the relevant act wascommitted—
(a) involved either—
(i) the possession by the defendant,
whilst in the presence of one ormore other persons, of any articleor item referred to in the Table tothis section, or
(ii) there being present in (or, in the
case of a false registration platereferred to in paragraph 8 of thatTable, present in or affixed to)any vehicle—
(I) the use of which appears con-
nected with the relevant act,and
(II) of which the defendant and
one or more other personswere occupants on or aboutthe date of commission of therelevant act,
any such article or item,
and
(b) those circumstances are such as give rise
to a reasonable suspicion that thedefendant’s state of mind was as afore-said at the time of the relevant act’scommission.
Table
1. Any balaclava, boiler suit or other means of dis-
guise or impersonation, including any article ofGarda uniform or any equipment supplied to amember of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na or imitation
thereof.
2. Any firearm (within the meaning of section 1 of
the Firearms Act 1925), ammunition for a firearmor device that appears to the ordinary observer sorealistic as to make it indistinguishable from afirearm.[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
3. Any knife to which section 9(1) of the Firearms
and Offensive Weapons Act 1990 applies, weaponof offence within the meaning of section 10(2) ofthat Act or weapon to which section 12 of thatAct applies.
4. Any implement for burglary or other article or
item for gaining access to any premises or otherstructure without the permission of the owner oroccupier thereof, including any key or card thathas been stolen or any access code unlawfullyprocured.
5. Any plan of any premises or other structure
unrelated to any lawful activity, trade or purposebeing pursued or engaged in by one or more ofthe persons referred to in subsection (6)( a).
6. Any controlled drug (within the meaning of the
Misuse of Drugs Act 1977).
7. Any substantial amounts, in cash, of any cur-
rency unrelated to any lawful activity, trade, trans-action or purpose being pursued or engaged in byone or more of the persons referred to in subsec-tion (6)( a).
8. Any false vehicle registration plate, that is to
say, any plate purporting to be a plate for a mech-anically propelled vehicle registered under section131 of the Finance Act 1992 and displaying anidentification mark other than that duly assignedby the Revenue Commissioners under Chapter IVof Part II of that Act and regulations thereunder.
9. Any article or item for making a counterfeit of
any currency note or coin or making a counterfeitor otherwise for making a forgery of any credit ordebit card.
10. Any article or item for making copies of any
work, being an article or item of a design enabling,and held in circumstances indicating that it wouldlikely be used for, the making, on a substantialscale, of infringing copies (within the meaning ofPart II of the Copyright and Related Rights Act2000) of the work without the copyright owner’sconsent.
11. Any other article or item prescribed for the
purposes of subsection (6).”.
7.—The Act of 2006 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 71A (inserted by section 5 ):
“Provisions
with respect toproof ofcriminalorganisation’sexistence.71B.—(1) In proceedings under this Part the
opinion of—
(a) any member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, or
9Pt.2 S.6
Evidential
provisions as toproof of criminalorganisation’sexistence.Pt.2 S.7
10[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) any former member of the Garda
Sı´ocha´na,
who appears to the Court to possess the appro-
priate expertise (in this section referred to as the‘appropriate expert’) shall, subject to section 74B,be admissible in evidence in relation to the issueas to the existence of a particular criminalorganisation.
(2) In subsection (1) ‘expertise’ means experi-
ence, specialised knowledge or qualifications.
(3) Without limiting the matters that can prop-
erly be taken into account, in the formation ofsuch opinion, by the appropriate expert, it shall bepermissible for that expert, in forming the opinionreferred to in subsection (1), to take into accountany previous convictions for arrestable offences ofpersons believed by that expert to be part of theorganisation to which the opinion relates.
(4) Without prejudice to subsection (1), in pro-
ceedings under this Part the following shall beadmissible as evidence that a particular group con-stitutes a criminal organisation—
(a) any document or other record emanat-
ing or purporting to emanate from thegroup or created or purporting to becreated by the defendant—
(i) from which the group’s existence as
a criminal organisation can beinferred;
(ii) from which the commission or
facilitation by the group of aserious offence or its engaging inany activity in relation thereto canbe inferred; or
(iii) that uses or makes reference to a
name, word, symbol or other rep-resentation that identifies thegroup as a criminal organisationor from which name, word, sym-bol or other representation it can
be inferred that it is such anorganisation,
(b) the provision by a group of 3 or more
persons of a material benefit to thedefendant (or a promise by such agroup to provide a material benefit tothe defendant), which provision orpromise is not made in return for alawful act performed or to be perfor-med by the defendant.[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(5) In subsection (4) ‘document or other
record’ includes, in addition to a document orother record in writing—
(a) a disc, tape, sound-track or other device
in which information, sounds or signalsare embodied so as to be capable (withor without the aid of some otherinstrument) of being reproduced inlegible or audible form,
(b) a film, tape or other device in which vis-
ual images are embodied so as to becapable (with or without the aid ofsome other instrument) of being repro-duced in visual form, and
(c) a photograph.”.
8.—(1) It is hereby declared that the ordinary courts are inad-
equate to secure the effective administration of justice and the pres-ervation of public peace and order in relation to an offence undereach of the following provisions of Part 7 of the Act of 2006, namely,sections 71A, 72, 73 and 76.
(2) An offence specified in subsection (1) shall be deemed to be
a scheduled offence for the purposes of Part V of the Act of 1939 asif an order had been made under section 36 of the Act of 1939 inrelation to it and subsection (3) of that section and section 37 of theAct of 1939 shall apply to such an offence accordingly.
(3) Nothing in subsection (1) or(2)shall be construed as affecting,
or limiting in any particular case, the exercise—
(a) by the Government of any of their powers under any pro-
vision of section 35 or 36 of the Act of 1939,
(b) by the Director of Public Prosecutions of his or her power
under section 45(2) of the Act of 1939 to direct that aperson not be sent forward for trial by the Special Crimi-nal Court on a particular charge, or
(c) by the Government or the Director of Public Prosecutions
of any other of their powers under Part V of the Act of1939 or by any other person of his or her powers underthat Part.
(4) This section shall, subject to subsection (5) , cease to be in
operation on and from the date that is 12 months from the passingof this Act unless a resolution has been passed by each House of theOireachtas resolving that this section should continue in operation.
(5) This section may be continued in operation from time to time
by a resolution passed by each House of the Oireachtas before itsexpiry for such period as may be specified in the resolutions.
(6) Before a resolution is passed by either House of the
Oireachtas under this section, the Minister for Justice, Equality andLaw Reform shall prepare a report, and shall cause a copy of it tobe laid before that House, of the operation of this section during the
11Pt.2 S.7
Certain offences
under Part 7 of Actof 2006 to bescheduled offences.Pt.2 S.8
New section 72A of
Act of 2006.
12[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
period beginning on the passing of this Act, or as may be appro-
priate, the date of the latest previous report under this subsection inrelation to this section and ending not later than 21 days before thedate of the moving of the resolution in that House.
9.—The Act of 2006 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 72:
“Offences
under thisPart:inferences thatmay be drawn.72A.—(1) Where in any proceedings against a
person for an offence under this Part evidence isgiven that the defendant at any time before he orshe was charged with the offence, on being quest-ioned by a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na in
relation to the offence, failed to answer any ques-tion material to the investigation of the offence,then the court in determining whether a chargeshould be dismissed under Part IA of the CriminalProcedure Act 1967 or whether there is a case toanswer and the court (or subject to the judge’sdirections, the jury) in determining whether thedefendant is guilty of the offence may draw suchinferences from the failure as appear proper; andthe failure may, on the basis of such inferences, betreated as, or as capable of amounting to, corrob-oration of any evidence in relation to the offence,but a person shall not be convicted of the offencesolely or mainly on an inference drawn from sucha failure.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not have effect unless—
(a) the defendant was told in ordinary lang-
uage when being questioned what theeffect of such a failure might be, and
(b) the defendant was afforded a reason-
able opportunity to consult a solicitorbefore such a failure occurred.
(3) Nothing in this section shall, in any
proceedings—
(a) prejudice the admissibility in evidence
of the silence or other reaction of thedefendant in the face of anything saidin his or her presence relating to theconduct in respect of which he or sheis charged, in so far as evidence thereofwould be admissible apart from thissection, or
(b) be taken to preclude the drawing of any
inference from the silence or otherreaction of the defendant which couldbe properly drawn apart from thissection.
(4) The court (or, subject to the judge’s direc-
tions, the jury) shall, for the purposes of drawingan inference under this section, have regard to[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
whenever, if appropriate, an answer to the ques-
tion concerned was first given by the defendant.
(5) This section shall not apply in relation to
the questioning of a person by a member of theGarda Sı ´ocha´na unless it is recorded by electronic
or similar means or the person consents in writingto it not being so recorded.
(6) References in subsection (1) to evidence
shall, in relation to the hearing of an applicationunder Part IA of the Criminal Procedure Act 1967for the dismissal of a charge, be taken to includea statement of the evidence to be given by a wit-ness at the trial.
(7) In this section ‘any question material to the
investigation of the offence’ means:
(a) a question requesting that the defendant
give a full account of his or her move-ments, actions, activities or associ-ations during any specified periodrelevant to the offence being investi-gated; and
(b) whichever one, or more than one, of the
following is relevant to the offencebeing investigated—
(i) a question relating to any statement
or conduct of the type referred toin section 71A(3);
(ii) a question relating to any benefit of
the type referred to in section71A(4)( b)(i) or 71B(4)( b) which
the member of the Garda Sı ´och-
a´na concerned reasonably believes
was received by the defendant oron his or her behalf;
(iii) a question relating to articles, or
documents or other records, of thetype referred to in section71A(4)( b)(ii) or (5)( a);
(iv) a question relating to any docu-
ment or other record of the typereferred to in section 71B(4)( a)—
(I) created or purporting to be
created by the defendant, or
(II) found in the possession of the
defendant on or about thetime of his or her arrest orfound on foot of a lawfulsearch of any premises orvehicle occupied by thedefendant;
13Pt.2 S.9Pt.2 S.9
Amendment of
section 73 of Act of2006.
Amendment of
section 74 of Act of2006.
14[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(v) a question relating to the suspected
use by the defendant in a docu-ment of, or the suspected refer-ence by him or her in a documentto, a name, word, symbol or otherrepresentation of the typereferred to in section71B(4)( a)(iii);
(vi) a question relating to—
(I) the possession by the defend-
ant, or
(II) the presence in a vehicle
referred to in section72(6)( a)(ii) and in the circum-
stances involving the defend-ant referred to in thatprovision,
of any article or item referred to
in the Table to section 72:
provided that no question shall be regarded as
being material to the investigation of the offenceunless the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na con-
cerned reasonably believed that the questionrelated to the participation of the defendant in thecommission of the offence.
(8) In this section references to a failure to
answer include references to the giving of ananswer that is false or misleading and referencesto the silence or other reaction of the defendantshall be construed accordingly.
(9) This section shall not apply in relation to a
failure to answer a question if the failure occurredbefore the commencement of section 9 of the
Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act 2009 .”.
10.—Section 73 of the Act of 2006 is amended by substituting, in
subsection (3), “15 years” for “10 years”.
11.—Section 74 of the Act of 2006 is amended—
(a) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) A person who does any act in a place outside the
State that would, if done in the State, be an offence undersection 71A or 72 and either—
(a) the act in question is done on board an Irish
ship or on an aircraft registered in the State, or
(b) the person is—
(i) an individual who is an Irish citizen or ordi-
narily resident in the State, or[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(ii) a body corporate established under the law
of the State or a company within themeaning of the Companies Acts,
then the person is guilty of an offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished as if he or she wereguilty of an offence under section 71A or 72, as the casemay be.”,
and
(b) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (2):
“(2A) Proceedings for—
(a) an offence under section 71 in relation to an act
committed outside the State, or
(b) an offence under subsection (1),
may be taken in any place in the State and the offence
may for all incidental purposes be treated as having beencommitted in that place.”.
12.—The Act of 2006 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 74:
“Aggravating
factor: seriousoffencecommitted aspart of, or infurtherance of,activities ofcriminalorganisation.74A.—(1) Where a court is determining the
sentence to be imposed on a person for a seriousoffence, the fact that the offence was committedas part of, or in furtherance of, the activities of acriminal organisation shall be treated for the pur-pose of determining the sentence as an aggravat-ing factor.
(2) Accordingly, the court shall (except where
the sentence for the serious offence is one ofimprisonment for life or where the court considersthat there are exceptional circumstances justifyingits not doing so) impose a sentence that is greaterthan that which would have been imposed in theabsence of such a factor.
(3) The sentence imposed shall not be greater
than the maximum sentence permissible for theserious offence.”.
13.—The Act of 2006 is amended by inserting the following section
after section 74A (inserted by section 12 ):
“Exclusion of
evidence incertaincircumstances.74B.—Nothing in this Part prevents a court, in
proceedings thereunder, from excluding evidencethat would otherwise be admissible if, in itsopinion, the prejudicial effect of the evidence out-weighs its probative value.”.
15Pt.2 S.11
New section 74A of
Act of 2006.
New section 74B of
Act of 2006.Pt.2
New section 26A of
Act of 2007 andamendment ofSchedule 2 to thatAct.
16[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
14.—(1) The Act of 2007 is amended by inserting the following
section after section 26:
“Post-release
orders in casesof certainoffences.26A.—(1) Where, on or after the commence-
ment of a scheme under subsection (10), a person(other than a person under the age of 18 years), inthis section referred to as ‘the offender’, is con-victed on indictment of—
(a) an offence under Part 7 of the Act of
2006, or
(b) an offence (other than an offence
referred to in paragraph ( a)) specified
in Schedule 2 that has been committedas part of, or in furtherance of, theactivities of a criminal organisation,
the court shall, in determining the sentence to be
imposed on the offender in respect of that offence,consider whether it is appropriate to make anorder under this section (in this section referred toas a ‘post-release (restrictions on certain activities)order’) in relation to him or her for the purposeof the offender’s being subject, after his or herrelease from prison, to the restrictions and con-ditions subsequently mentioned in this section.
(2) A post-release (restrictions on certain
activities) order shall not be made in relation tothe offender unless the court considers that, hav-ing regard to—
(a) the evidence given in the trial of the
offender for the offence concerned,and
(b) evidence that is given to the court in
relation to the sentence to be imposedfor that offence,
it is in the public interest to make such an order,
and in determining whether to make such orderthe court shall take account of such matters as thecourt considers appropriate, including theoffender’s previous criminal record and the othercircumstances relating to him or her.
(3) There is, by virtue of this subsection, con-
ferred on the court power to make, as part of theoffender’s sentence, a post-release (restrictions oncertain activities) order in relation to him or her,that is to say, an order imposing one or more (andno other) of the following restrictions andconditions:
(a) restrictions on the offender’s move-
ments, actions or activities;
(b) conditions subject to which the offender
may engage in any activity;[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(c) restrictions on the offender’s association
with others or conditions subject towhich the offender may associate withothers,
being restrictions and conditions, as to both their
nature and extent, that—
(i) are determined by the court to be no
more than is reasonably necessary tobe imposed in the public interest, and
(ii) fall into a category of restrictions and
conditions specified in a scheme madeunder subsection (10).
(4) A post-release (restrictions on certain
activities) order may be made for such period, notexceeding 7 years, as the court considersappropriate.
(5) A post-release (restriction of certain
activities) order in relation to the offender shallcome into force on the date on which—
(a) the sentence of imprisonment imposed
on him or her in respect of the offenceconcerned expires or, as the case maybe, his or her remission from the sen-tence begins, or
(b) if the offender is imprisoned in respect
of another offence, the date on whichthat sentence of imprisonment expiresor, as the case may be, his or herremission from that sentence begins,
whichever is the later.
(6) Where a post-release (restriction of certain
activities) order is made (whether or not it is inforce), the court that made the order may, if it sothinks proper, on the application of the offendervary or revoke the order if it is satisfied that byreason of such matters or circumstances specifiedin the application that have arisen or occurredsince the making of the order that it should bevaried or revoked.
(7) An application under subsection (6) shall be
made on notice to an inspector of the GardaSı´ocha´na of the district in which the offender ordi-
narily resided at the time that the order was madeor, if appropriate, an inspector of the Garda Sı ´och-
a´na of the district in which the home of the
offender is located at the time of the application.
(8) A person who fails, without reasonable
cause, to comply with a post-release (restriction ofcertain activities) order shall be guilty of anoffence and shall be liable on summary conviction
17Pt.2 S.14Pt.2 S.14
Amendment of Bail
Act 1997.
Increase of penalty
for intimidation ofwitnesses, jurors,etc.
Amendment of
Criminal ProcedureAct 1967.
18[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
to a fine not exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 12 months or both.
(9) Nothing in this section shall affect any other
order, restriction or obligation, or any conditionattaching thereto, to which the offender is subjectwhether made or imposed under statute (includingsection 26) or otherwise apart from this sectionwhile a post-release (restrictions of certainactivities) order is in force.
(10) ( a) As soon as practicable, but not later
than 6 months, after the commence-ment of section 14 of the Criminal
Justice (Amendment) Act 2009 , the
Minister shall prepare a scheme speci-fying 2 or more categories of restric-tions and conditions that may beimposed by post-release (restrictionson certain activities) orders and lay adraft of the scheme before each Houseof the Oireachtas.
(b) If the draft of the scheme, so laid, is
approved by a resolution passed byeach such House, the Minister shallmake the scheme as soon as practi-cable thereafter.
(11) In this section ‘home’, in relation to the
offender, means his or her sole or main residenceor, if he or she has no such residence, his or hermost usual place of abode or, if he or she has nosuch abode, the place which he or she regularlyvisits.”.
(2) Schedule 2 to the Act of 2007 is amended, in paragraph 9, by
substituting the following subparagraphs for subparagraph ( b):
“(b) section 71A (directing activities of a criminal
organisation);
(ba) section 72 (offence to participate in, or contribute
to, certain activities);”.
15.—The Schedule to the Bail Act 1997 is amended, in paragraph
28A, by inserting “71A,” after “71,”.
16.—Section 41 of the Act of 1999 is amended by substituting, in
subsection (5)( b), “15 years” for “10 years”.
17.—The Criminal Procedure Act 1967 is amended—
(a) in section 13(1), by inserting “71A,” after “or an offence
under section 71,”, and
(b) in section 29(1), by inserting, in paragraph ( l), “71A,” after
“an offence under section 71,”.[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
PART 3
Offences under certain enactments: provision for extra-
territorial effect
18.—(1) Section 7 of the Act of 1939 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1), by inserting “(whether in or outside the
State)” after “Every person who”, and
(b) in subsection (2), by inserting “(whether in or outside the
State)” after “Every person who”.
(2) Section 7 of the Act of 1939 is further amended by inserting
the following after subsection (2):
“(3) A person shall be guilty of an offence under this section
for conduct that the person engages in outside the State only if—
(a) the conduct takes place on board an Irish ship (within
the meaning of section 9 of the Mercantile MarineAct 1955),
(b) the conduct takes place on an aircraft registered in
the State,
(c) the person is an Irish citizen, or
(d) the person is ordinarily resident in the State.
(4) A person who has his principal residence in the State for
the 12 months immediately preceding the commission of anoffence under subsection (1) or (2) of this section is, for thepurposes of subsection (3)( d) of this section, ordinarily resident
in the State on the date of the commission of the offence.”.
19.—(1) Section 7 of the Act of 1997 is amended by inserting the
following subsection after subsection (1):
“(1A) Any person who, outside the State, aids, abets, coun-
sels or procures the commission of an indictable offence in theState shall be liable to be indicted, tried and punished as a prin-cipal offender if—
(a) the person does so on board an Irish ship,
(b) the person does so on an aircraft registered in the
State,
(c) the person is an Irish citizen, or
(d) the person is ordinarily resident in the State.”.
(2) Section 7 of the Act of 1997 is further amended—
(a) in subsection (2), by inserting “, whether in or outside the
State,” after “any act”,
(b) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (2):
19Amendment of
section 7 of Act of1939.
Amendment of
sections 7 and 8 ofAct of 1997.Pt.3 S.19
20[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
“(2A) A person shall be guilty of an offence under sub-
section (2) for doing an act outside the State only if—
(a) the person does so on board an Irish ship,
(b) the person does so on an aircraft registered in
the State,
(c) the person is an Irish citizen, or
(d) the person is ordinarily resident in the State.”,
and
(c) by inserting the following subsections after subsection (7):
“(8) A person who has his or her principal residence
in the State for the 12 months immediately preceding thecommission of an offence referred to in subsection (1A)or an offence under subsection (2) is, for the purposes ofsubsection (1A)( d) or (in the case of an offence under sub-
section (2)) subsection (2A)( d), taken to be ordinarily resi-
dent in the State on the date of the commission of theoffence.
(9) In this section ‘Irish ship’ has the meaning it has in
section 9 of the Mercantile Marine Act 1955.”.
(3) Section 8 of the Act of 1997 is amended, in subsection (1), by
substituting “accepts (or agrees to accept), whether in or outside theState, for not disclosing that information any consideration” for“accepts or agrees to accept for not disclosing that information anyconsideration”.
(4) Section 8 of the Act of 1997 is further amended—
(a) by inserting the following after subsection (1):
“(1A) A person shall be guilty of an offence under sub-
section (1) for conduct that the person engages in outsidethe State only if—
(a) the conduct takes place on board an Irish ship,
(b) the conduct takes place on an aircraft registered
in the State,
(c) the person is an Irish citizen, or
(d) the person is ordinarily resident in the State.”,
and
(b) by inserting the following subsections after subsection (4):
“(5) A person who has his or her principal residence
in the State for the 12 months immediately preceding thecommission of an offence under subsection (1) is, for thepurposes of subsection (1A)( d), ordinarily resident in the
State on the date of the commission of the offence.[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(6) In this section ‘Irish ship’ has the same meaning as
it has in section 7.”.
20.—Section 41 of the Act of 1999 is amended—
(a) in subsection (1)( a), by substituting “who (whether in or
outside the State) harms” for “who harms”, and
(b) by inserting the following subsections after subsection (3):
“(3A) A person shall be guilty of an offence under this
section for conduct that the person engages in outside theState only if—
(a) the conduct takes place on board an Irish ship
(within the meaning of section 9 of the Mer-cantile Marine Act 1955),
(b) the conduct takes place on an aircraft registered
in the State,
(c) the person is an Irish citizen, or
(d) the person is ordinarily resident in the State.
(3B) A person who has his or her principal residence
in the State for the 12 months immediately preceding thecommission of an offence under subsection (1) is, for thepurposes of subsection (3A)( d), ordinarily resident in the
State on the date of the commission of the offence.”.
PART 4
Amendments concerning detention and re-arrest powers
21.—(1) Section 30 of the Act of 1939 is amended—
(a) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (3):
“(3A) If at any time during the detention of a person
pursuant to this section a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na,
with reasonable cause, suspects that person of having com-mitted an offence (the ‘other offence’) referred to in sub-section (1) of this section, being an offence other than theoffence to which the detention relates, and—
(a) the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na then in
charge of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na station, or
(b) in case the person is being detained in a place
of detention, other than a Garda Sı ´ocha´na
station, an officer of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na not
below the rank of inspector who is notinvestigating the offence to which the deten-tion relates or the other offence,
has reasonable grounds for believing that the continued
detention of the person is necessary for the proper investi-gation of the other offence, the person may continue to be
21Pt.3 S.19
Amendment of
section 41(substantiveelements ofoffence) of Act of1999.
Amendment of
sections 30 and 30Aof Act of 1939.Pt.4 S.21
22[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
detained in relation to the other offence as if that offence
was the offence for which the person was originallydetained, but nothing in this subsection authorises thedetention of the person for a period that is longer than theperiod which is authorised by or under the other pro-visions of this section.”,
(b) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (4B):
“(4BA) ( a) Without prejudice to paragraph ( b) of this
subsection, where a judge hearing an appli-cation under subsection (4) of this section issatisfied, in order to avoid a risk of prejudiceto the investigation concerned, that it is desir-able to do so, he may—
(i) direct that the application be heard other-
wise than in public, or
(ii) exclude from the Court during the hearing
all persons except officers of the Court,persons directly concerned in the pro-ceedings, bona fide representatives of the
Press and such other persons as the Courtmay permit to remain.
(b) On the hearing of an application under subsec-
tion (4) of this section, the judge may, of hisown motion or on application by the officer ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na making the application
under that subsection (4), where it appearsthat—
(i) particular evidence to be given by any
member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na during the
hearing (including evidence by way of
answer to a question asked of the memberin cross-examination) concerns steps thathave been, or may be, taken in the courseof any inquiry or investigation being con-ducted by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na with
respect to the suspected involvement ofthe person to whom the applicationrelates, or any other person, in the com-mission of the offence to which the deten-tion relates or any other offence, and
(ii) the nature of those steps is such that the
giving of that evidence concerning themcould prejudice, in a material respect, theproper conducting of any foregoinginquiry or investigation,
direct that, in the public interest, the particular
evidence shall be given in the absence of everyperson, including the person to whom theapplication relates and any legal representative(whether of that person or the applicant),other than—[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(I) the member or members whose attendance
is necessary for the purpose of giving theevidence to the judge; and
(II) if the judge deems it appropriate, such one
or more of the clerks of the Court as thejudge determines.
(c) If, having heard such evidence given in that
manner, the judge considers the disclosure ofthe matters to which that evidence relateswould not have the effect referred to in para-graph ( b)(ii) of this subsection, the judge shall
direct the evidence to be re-given in the pres-ence of all the other persons (or, as the casemay be, those of them not otherwise excludedfrom the Court under paragraph ( a) of this
subsection).
(d) No person shall publish or broadcast or cause
to be published or broadcast any informationabout an application under subsection (4) ofthis section other than a statement of—
(i) the fact that the application has been made
by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na in relation to a
particular investigation, and
(ii) any decision resulting from the application.
(e) If any matter is published or broadcast in con-
travention of paragraph ( d) of this subsection,
the following persons, namely—
(i) in the case of a publication in a newspaper
or periodical, any proprietor, any editorand any publisher of the newspaper orperiodical,
(ii) in the case of any other publication, the
person who publishes it, and
(iii) in the case of a broadcast, any person who
transmits or provides the programme inwhich the broadcast is made and any per-son having functions in relation to theprogramme corresponding to those of theeditor of a newspaper,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be
liable—
(I) on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months or to both,or
(II) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not
exceeding \50,000 or to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 3 years or to both.
(f) In this subsection—
23Pt.4 S.21Pt.4 S.21
24[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
‘broadcast’ means the transmission, relaying or
distribution by wireless telegraphy, cable or theinternet of communications, sounds, signs, vis-ual images or signals, intended for direct recep-tion by the general public whether such
communications, sounds, signs, visual imagesor signals are actually received or not;
‘publish’ means publish, other than by way of
broadcast, to the public or a portion of thepublic.
(4BB) Save where any rule of law requires such an
issue to be determined by the Court, in an applicationunder subsection (4) of this section no issue as to the law-fulness of the arrest or detention of the person to whomthe application relates may be raised.
(4BC) ( a) In an application under subsection (4) of this
section it shall not be necessary for a memberof the Garda Sı ´ocha´na, other than the officer
making the application, to give oral evidencefor the purposes of the application and the lat-ter officer may testify in relation to any matterwithin the knowledge of another member ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na that is relevant to the
application notwithstanding that it is not withinthe personal knowledge of the officer.
(b) However, the Court hearing such an application
may, if it considers it to be in the interests ofjustice to do so, direct that another member ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na give oral evidence and the
Court may adjourn the hearing of the appli-cation for the purpose of receiving suchevidence.”,
(c) by substituting the following subsection for subsection
(4D):
“(4D) If—
(a) an application is to be made, or is made, under
subsection (4) of this section for a warrantauthorising the detention for a further periodof a person detained pursuant to a directionunder subsection (3) of this section, and
(b) the period of detention under subsection (3) of
this section has not expired at the time of thearrival of the person concerned at the courthouse for the purposes of the hearing of theapplication but would, but for this subsection,expire before, or during the hearing (including,if such should occur, any adjournment of thehearing),
it shall be deemed not to expire until the final determi-
nation of the application; and, for purposes of thissubsection—[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(i) a certificate signed by the court clerk in attend-
ance at the court house concerned stating thetime of the arrival of the person concerned atthat court house shall be evidence, until thecontrary is shown, of the time of that person’sarrival there;
(ii) ‘court house’ includes any venue at which the
hearing of the application takes place.”.
(2) Section 30A of the Act of 1939 is amended by substituting the
following subsections for subsection (1):
“(1) Where a person arrested on suspicion of having commit-
ted an offence is detained pursuant to section 30 of this Act andis released without any charge having been made against him,he shall not—
(a) be arrested again in connection with the offence to
which the detention related, or
(b) be arrested for any other offence of which, at the time
of the first arrest, the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
by whom he was arrested, suspected, or oughtreasonably to have suspected, him of havingcommitted,
except under the authority of a warrant issued by a judge of the
District Court who is satisfied on information supplied on oathby a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na not below the rank of
superintendent that either of the following cases apply,namely—
(i) further information has come to the knowledge of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na since the person’s release as to his
suspected participation in the offence for which hisarrest is sought,
(ii) notwithstanding that the Garda Sı ´ocha´na had know-
ledge, prior to the person’s release, of the person’ssuspected participation in the offence for which hisarrest is sought, the questioning of the person inrelation to that offence, prior to his release, wouldnot have been in the interests of the proper investi-gation of the offence.
(1A) An application for a warrant under this section shall be
heard otherwise than in public.”.
(3) Section 30A of the Act of 1939 is further amended, in subsec-
tion (2)( b), by substituting “(4B), (4BA), (4BB), (4BC)’’ for “(4B)’’.
22.—(1) Section 2 of the Act of 1996 is amended—
(a) in subsection (2)( b), by substituting ‘superintendent’ for
‘chief superintendent’,
(b) by inserting the following subsections after subsection (3):
“(3A) ( a) Without prejudice to paragraph ( b), where a
judge hearing an application under subsection
25Pt.4 S.21
Amendment of
sections 2, 4, 5 and11 of Act of 1996.Pt.4 S.22
26[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(2) is satisfied, in order to avoid a risk of preju-
dice to the investigation concerned, that it isdesirable to do so, he or she may—
(i) direct that the application be heard other-
wise than in public, or
(ii) exclude from the Court during the hearing
all persons except officers of the Court,persons directly concerned in the pro-ceedings, bona fide representatives of the
Press and such other persons as the Courtmay permit to remain.
(b) On the hearing of an application under subsec-
tion (2), the judge may, of his or her ownmotion or on application by the officer of theGarda Sı ´ocha´na making the application under
subsection (2), where it appears that—
(i) particular evidence to be given by any
member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na during the
hearing (including evidence by way ofanswer to a question asked of the memberin cross-examination) concerns steps thathave been, or may be taken, in the courseof any inquiry or investigation being con-ducted by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na with
respect to the suspected involvement ofthe person to whom the applicationrelates, or any other person, in the com-mission of the offence to which the deten-tion relates or any other offence, and
(ii) the nature of those steps is such that the
giving of that evidence concerning themcould prejudice, in a material respect, theproper conducting of any foregoinginquiry or investigation,
direct that, in the public interest, the particular
evidence shall be given in the absence of everyperson, including the person to whom theapplication relates and any legal representative(whether of that person or the applicant),other than—
(I) the member or members whose attendance
is necessary for the purpose of giving theevidence to the judge; and
(II) if the judge deems it appropriate, such one
or more of the clerks or registrars of theCourt as the judge determines.
(c) If, having heard such evidence given in that
manner, the judge considers the disclosure ofthe matters to which that evidence relateswould not have the effect referred to in para-graph ( b)(ii), the judge shall direct the evi-
dence to be re-given in the presence of all theother persons (or, as the case may be, those of[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
them not otherwise excluded from the Court
under paragraph ( a)).
(d) No person shall publish or broadcast or cause
to be published or broadcast any informationabout an application under subsection (2)other than a statement of—
(i) the fact that the application has been made
by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na in relation to a
particular investigation, and
(ii) any decision resulting from the application.
(e) If any matter is published or broadcast in con-
travention of paragraph ( d), the following per-
sons, namely—
(i) in the case of a publication in a newspaper
or periodical, any proprietor, any editorand any publisher of the newspaper orperiodical,
(ii) in the case of any other publication, the
person who publishes it, and
(iii) in the case of a broadcast, any person who
transmits or provides the programme inwhich the broadcast is made and any per-son having functions in relation to theprogramme corresponding to those of theeditor of a newspaper,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be
liable—
(I) on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months or both, or
(II) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not
exceeding \50,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 years or both.
(f) Where an offence under this subsection has
been committed by a body corporate and isproved to have been committed with the con-sent or connivance of or to be attributable toany neglect on the part of a person being adirector, manager, secretary or other officer ofthe body corporate, or a person who was pur-porting to act in any such capacity, that person
as well as the body corporate shall be guilty ofan offence and be liable to be proceededagainst and punished as if he or she were guiltyof the first-mentioned offence.
(g) Where the affairs of a body corporate are man-
aged by its members, paragraph ( f) shall apply
in relation to the acts and defaults of a member
27Pt.4 S.22Pt.4 S.22
28[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
in connection with his or her functions of man-
agement as if he or she were a director or man-ager of the body corporate.
(h) In this subsection—
‘broadcast’ means the transmission, relaying or
distribution by wireless telegraphy, cable or theinternet of communications, sounds, signs, vis-ual images or signals, intended for direct recep-tion by the general public whether suchcommunications, sounds, signs, visual imagesor signals are actually received or not;
‘publish’ means publish, other than by way of
broadcast, to the public or a portion of thepublic.
(3B) Save where any rule of law requires such an issue
to be determined by the Court, in an application undersubsection (2) no issue as to the lawfulness of the arrestor detention of the person to whom the application relatesmay be raised.
(3C) ( a) In an application under subsection (2) it shall
not be necessary for a member of the GardaSı´ocha´na, other than the officer making the
application, to give oral evidence for the pur-poses of the application and the latter officermay testify in relation to any matter within theknowledge of another member of the GardaSı´ocha´na that is relevant to the application not-
withstanding that it is not within the personalknowledge of the officer.
(b) However, the Court hearing such an application
may, if it considers it be in the interests ofjustice to do so, direct that another member ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na give oral evidence and the
Court may adjourn the hearing of the appli-cation for the purpose of receiving suchevidence.”,
(c) by substituting the following subsection for subsection
(7A):
“(7A) Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (7), if—
(a) an application is to be made, or is made, under
subsection (2) for a warrant authorising thedetention for a further period of a persondetained under that subsection, and
(b) the period of detention under that subsection
has not expired at the time of the arrival of theperson concerned at the court house for thepurposes of the hearing of the application butwould, but for this subsection, expire before,or during the hearing (including, if such shouldoccur, any adjournment of the hearing),[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
it shall be deemed not to expire until the final determi-
nation of the application; and, for purposes of thissubsection—
(i) a certificate signed by the court clerk or regis-
trar in attendance at the court house concernedstating the time of the arrival of the personconcerned at that court house shall be evi-dence, until the contrary is shown, of the timeof that person’s arrival there;
(ii) ‘court house’ includes any venue at which the
hearing of the application takes place.”.
(2) Section 4 of the Act of 1996 is amended by substituting the
following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) Where a person arrested on suspicion of having commit-
ted an offence is detained pursuant to section 2 and is releasedwithout any charge having been made against him or her, he orshe shall not—
(a) be arrested again in connection with the offence to
which the detention related, or
(b) be arrested for any other offence of which, at the time
of the first arrest, the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
by whom he or she was arrested suspected, or oughtreasonably to have suspected, him or her of havingcommitted,
except on the authority of a warrant issued by a judge of the
Circuit Court or the District Court who is satisfied on infor-mation supplied on oath by a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
not below the rank of superintendent that either of the followingcases apply, namely—
(i) further information has come to the knowledge of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na since the person’s release as to the
person’s suspected participation in the offence forwhich his or her arrest is sought,
(ii) notwithstanding that the Garda Sı ´ocha´na had know-
ledge, prior to his or her release, of the person’s sus-pected participation in the offence for which his orher arrest is sought, the questioning of the person inrelation to that offence, prior to his or her release,would not have been in the interests of the properinvestigation of the offence.
(1A) An application for a warrant under this section shall be
heard otherwise than in public.”.
(3) Section 5 of the Act of 1996 is amended by inserting “4(8B),”
after “4(8A),”.
(4) Section 11 of the Act of 1996 is repealed and, accordingly,
sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of that Act (being the sections to which thatsection 11 related) shall continue in operation indefinitely.
29Pt.4 S.22Pt.4
Amendment of
sections 50, 51 and52 of Act of 2007.
30[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
23.—(1) Section 50 of the Act of 2007 is amended in subsection
(1)—
(a) by substituting, in paragraph ( c), “Act of 1925,” for “Act
of 1925, or”,
(b) by substituting, in paragraph ( d), “firearm, or” for “fire-
arm.”, and
(c) by inserting the following paragraph after paragraph ( d):
“(e) an offence under Part 7 of the Criminal Justice
Act 2006.”.
(2) Section 50 of the Act of 2007 is further amended—
(a) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (4):
“(4A) ( a) Without prejudice to paragraph ( b), where a
judge hearing an application under subsection(3) is satisfied, in order to avoid a risk of preju-dice to the investigation concerned, that it isdesirable to do so, he or she may—
(i) direct that the application be heard other-
wise than in public, or
(ii) exclude from the Court during the hearing
all persons except officers of the Court,persons directly concerned in the pro-ceedings, bona fide representatives of the
Press and such other persons as the Courtmay permit to remain.
(b) On the hearing of an application under subsec-
tion (3), the judge may, of his or her ownmotion or on application by the member of theGarda Sı ´ocha´na making the application under
subsection (3), where it appears that—
(i) particular evidence to be given by any
member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na during the
hearing (including evidence by way ofanswer to a question asked of the memberin cross-examination) concerns steps thathave been, or may be, taken in the courseof any inquiry or investigation being con-ducted by the Garda Sı ´ocha´na with
respect to the suspected involvement ofthe person to whom the applicationrelates, or any other person, in the com-mission of the offence to which the deten-tion relates or any other offence, and
(ii) the nature of those steps is such that the
giving of that evidence concerning themcould prejudice, in a material respect, theproper conducting of any foregoinginquiry or investigation,
direct that, in the public interest, the particular
evidence shall be given in the absence of every[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
person, including the person to whom the
application relates and any legal representative(whether of that person or the applicant),other than—
(I) the member or members whose attendance
is necessary for the purpose of giving theevidence to the judge; and
(II) if the judge deems it appropriate, such one
or more of the clerks or registrars of theCourt as the judge determines.
(c) If, having heard such evidence given in that
manner, the judge considers the disclosure ofthe matters to which that evidence relateswould not have the effect referred to in para-graph ( b)(ii), the judge shall direct the evi-
dence to be re-given in the presence of all theother persons (or, as the case may be, those ofthem not otherwise excluded from the Courtunder paragraph ( a)).
(d) No person shall publish or broadcast or cause
to be published or broadcast any informationabout an application under this section otherthan a statement of—
(i) the fact that the application has been
brought by a named person in relation toa particular investigation, and
(ii) any decision resulting from the application.
(e) If any matter is published or broadcast in con-
travention of paragraph ( d), the following per-
sons, namely—
(i) in the case of a publication in a newspaper
or periodical, any proprietor, any editorand any publisher of the newspaper orperiodical,
(ii) in the case of any other publication, the
person who publishes it, and
(iii) in the case of a broadcast, any person who
transmits or provides the programme inwhich the broadcast is made and any per-son having functions in relation to theprogramme corresponding to those of theeditor of a newspaper,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be
liable—
(I) on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding \5,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months or both, or
31Pt.4 S.23Pt.4 S.23
32[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(II) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not
exceeding \50,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 years or both.
(f) Where an offence under this subsection has
been committed by a body corporate and isproved to have been committed with the con-sent or connivance of or to be attributable toany neglect on the part of a person being adirector, manager, secretary or other officer ofthe body corporate, or a person who was pur-porting to act in any such capacity, that personas well as the body corporate shall be guilty ofan offence and be liable to be proceededagainst and punished as if he or she were guiltyof the first-mentioned offence.
(g) Where the affairs of a body corporate are man-
aged by its members, paragraph ( f) shall apply
in relation to the acts and defaults of a memberin connection with his or her functions of man-agement as if he or she were a director or man-ager of the body corporate.
(h) In this subsection—
‘broadcast’ means the transmission, relaying or
distribution by wireless telegraphy, cable or theinternet of communications, sounds, signs, vis-ual images or signals, intended for direct recep-tion by the general public whether suchcommunications, sounds, signs, visual imagesor signals are actually received or not;
‘publish’ means publish, other than by way of
broadcast, to the public or a portion of thepublic.
(4B) Save where any rule of law requires such an issue
to be determined by the Court, in an application undersubsection (3) no issue as to the lawfulness of the arrestor detention of the person to whom the application relatesmay be raised.
(4C) ( a) In an application under subsection (3) it shall
not be necessary for a member of the GardaSı´ocha´na, other than the member making the
application, to give oral evidence for the pur-poses of the application and the latter membermay testify in relation to any matter within theknowledge of another member of the GardaSı´ocha´na that is relevant to the application not-
withstanding that it is not within the personalknowledge of the member.
(b) However, the Court hearing such an application
may, if it considers it to be in the interests ofjustice to do so, direct that another member ofthe Garda Sı ´ocha´na give oral evidence and the
Court may adjourn the hearing of the appli-cation for the purpose of receiving suchevidence.”,[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) by substituting the following subsection for subsection (9):
“(9) Notwithstanding subsections (3) and (8), if—
(a) an application is to be made, or is made, under
subsection (3) for a warrant authorising thedetention for a further period of a persondetained under that subsection, and
(b) the period of detention under that subsection
has not expired at the time of the arrival of theperson concerned at the court house for thepurposes of the hearing of the application butwould, but for this subsection, expire before,or during the hearing (including, if such shouldoccur, any adjournment of the hearing),
it shall be deemed not to expire until the final determi-
nation of the application; and, for purposes of thissubsection—
(i) a certificate signed by the court clerk or regis-
trar in attendance at the court house concernedstating the time of the arrival of the personconcerned at that court house shall be evi-dence, until the contrary is shown, of the timeof that person’s arrival there;
(ii) ‘court house’ includes any venue at which the
hearing of the application takes place.”.
(3) Section 51 of the Act of 2007 is amended by substituting the
following subsections for subsection (1):
“(1) Where a person arrested on suspicion of having commit-
ted an offence is detained pursuant to section 50 and is releasedwithout any charge having been made against him or her, he orshe shall not—
(a) be arrested again in connection with the offence to
which the detention related, or
(b) be arrested for any other offence of which, at the time
of the first arrest, the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
by whom he or she was arrested suspected, or oughtreasonably to have suspected him or her, of havingcommitted,
except on the authority of a warrant issued by a judge of the
Circuit Court or the District Court who is satisfied on infor-mation supplied on oath by a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
not below the rank of superintendent that either of the followingcases apply, namely:
(i) further information has come to the knowledge of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na since the person’s release as to his
or her suspected participation in the offence forwhich his or her arrest is sought,
(ii) notwithstanding that the Garda Sı ´ocha´na had know-
ledge, prior to the person’s release, of the person’ssuspected participation in the offence for which his
33Pt.4 S.23Pt.4 S.23
Amendment of
sections 4, 9 and 10of Act of 1984.
34[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
or her arrest is sought, the questioning of the person
in relation to that offence, prior to his or her releasewould not have been in the interests of the properinvestigation of the offence.
(1A) An application for a warrant under this section shall be
heard otherwise than in public.”.
(4) Section 52 of the Act of 2007 is amended by inserting “4(8B),”
after “4(8A),”.
24.—(1) Section 4 of the Act of 1984 is amended—
(a) by inserting the following subsection after subsection (8A):
“(8B) ( a) Where a medical practitioner—
(i) has, at the request of a member of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na, assessed the condition of
a person detained pursuant to subsection(2), and
(ii) certifies that the person, although the per-
son’s condition is not such as to requirethe person’s hospitalisation, is unfit forany questioning for the purpose of theinvestigation for a specified period,
no questioning of the person shall take place
during that period and that period shall beexcluded in reckoning a period of detentionpermitted by this section.
(b) The period that may be specified in a certificate
provided under paragraph ( a) by a medical
practitioner shall not exceed 6 hours.
(c) A certificate may be provided under paragraph
(a) on one occasion only in respect of the part-
icular person detained pursuant to subsection(2).”,
and
(b) in subsection (9) by substituting “, (8A) or (8B)” for “or
(8A)”.
(2) Section 9 of the Act of 1984 is amended by inserting “4(8B),”
after “4(8A),”.
(3) Section 10 of the Act of 1984 is amended by substituting the
following subsection for subsection (1):
“(1) Where a person arrested on suspicion of having commit-
ted an offence is detained pursuant to section 4 and is releasedwithout any charge having been made against him, he shallnot—
(a) be arrested again in connection with the offence to
which the detention related, or[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(b) be arrested for any other offence of which, at the time
of the first arrest, the member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
by whom he was arrested suspected, or oughtreasonably to have suspected him of havingcommitted,
except on the authority of a warrant issued by a judge of the
District Court who is satisfied on information supplied on oathby a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na not below the rank of
superintendent that either of the following cases apply, namely:
(i) further information has come to the knowledge of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na since the person’s release as to his
suspected participation in the offence for which hisarrest is sought, or
(ii) notwithstanding that the Garda Sı ´ocha´na had know-
ledge, prior to the person’s release, of the person’ssuspected participation in the offence for which hisarrest is sought, the questioning of the person inrelation to that offence, prior to his release, wouldnot have been in the interests of the proper investi-gation of the offence.
A person arrested under that authority shall be dealt with pursu-
ant to section 4.
(1A) An application for a warrant under this section shall be
heard otherwise than in public.”.
PART 5
Miscellaneous
25.—The Offences against the State (Amendment) Act 1998 is
amended by substituting the following section for section 6:
“Directing an
unlawfulorganisation.6.—(1) In this section—
(a) ‘directs’, in relation to activities,
means—
(i) controls or supervises the activi-
ties, or
(ii) gives an order, instruction or guid-
ance, or makes a request, withrespect to the carrying on of theactivities;
(b) ‘serious offence’ means an offence for
which a person may be punished byimprisonment for a term of 4 years ormore;
(c) ‘unlawful organisation’ means an organ-
isation in respect of which a sup-pression order has been made undersection 19 of the Act of 1939;
35Pt.4 S.24
Directing activities
of an unlawfulorganisation.Pt.5 S.25
36[No. 32.] [2009.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(d) references to activities include refer-
ences to—
(i) activities carried on outside the
State, and
(ii) activities that do not constitute an
offence or offences.
(2) A person who directs, at any level of the
organisation’s structure, the activities of an unlaw-ful organisation shall be guilty of an offence andshall be liable on conviction on indictment toimprisonment for life or a lesser term ofimprisonment.
(3) Any statement made orally, in writing or
otherwise, or any conduct, by the defendantimplying or leading to a reasonable inference thathe or she was at a material time directing theactivities of an unlawful organisation shall, in pro-ceedings for an offence under this section, beadmissible as evidence that the defendant wasdoing such at that time.
(4) In proceedings under this section, the court
or the jury, as the case may be, in determiningwhether an offence under this section has beencommitted, may, in addition to any other relevantevidence, also consider—
(a) any evidence of a pattern of behaviour
on the part of the defendant consistentwith his or her having directed theactivities of the organisation concernedat the material time, and
(b) without limiting paragraph ( a) or sub-
section (3)—
(i) whether the defendant has received
any benefit from the organisationconcerned, and
(ii) evidence as to the possession by the
defendant of such articles or docu-ments or other records as wouldgive rise to a reasonable suspicionthat such articles, documents orother records were in his or herpossession or control for a pur-pose connected with directing theactivities of the organisationconcerned.
(5) Any document or other record emanating
or purporting to emanate from the organisationconcerned from which there can be inferred—
(a) either—[2009.] [ No. 32.] Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act
2009 .
(i) the giving, at the time concerned,
of an instruction, order or guid-ance by the defendant to any per-son involved in the organisation,or
(ii) the making, at that time, by the
defendant of a request of a personso involved,
or
(b) the seeking, at that time, by a person so
involved of assistance or guidancefrom the defendant,
shall, in proceedings for an offence under this
section, be admissible as evidence that the defend-ant was directing the activities of the organisationconcerned at the material time.
(6) The expression ‘other record’ in this section
shall receive a like construction to that which isprovided for by section 2 of the Act of 1939 withrespect to the expression ‘document’.’’.
26.—An application under any enactment to a court, or a judge of
a court, for a search warrant shall be heard otherwise than in public.
37Pt.5 S.25
Search warrant
applications to beheard otherwisethan in public.————————
AN ACHT UM CHEARTAS COIRIU ´IL (LEASU ´) 2009
CRIMINAL JUSTICE (AMENDMENT) ACT 2009
————————
EXPLANATORY AND FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
————————
Purpose of the Act
The primary purpose of this Act is to introduce additional
measures targeted at combating organised crime. The Act addressesthe increasing levels of violence by targeting those who direct theactivities of criminal organisations and those who participate in theactivities of such organisations. In doing so, the Act will also meetobligations which arise under the UN Convention on TransnationalOrganised Crime. In addition to introducing greater penalties for anumber of offences, it provides for the hearing by the Special Crimi-nal Court of specified organised crime offences unless the Directorof Public Prosecutions directs otherwise. The Act also amends Gardadetention, re-arrest and search powers.Provisions of the Act
PART 1
Preliminary and General
Part 1 sets down the short title of the Act and defines certain terms
used in the Act.
Section 1 provides that the short title of the Act will be Criminal
Justice (Amendment) Act 2009.
Section 2 defines certain terms used in the Act.
PART 2
Organised Crime
Section 3 amends section 70 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006. Sub-
section (1) amends the definitions of ‘‘criminal organisation’’ and‘‘structured group’’ contained in that section. Subsection (2) defines‘‘a person ordinarily resident in the State’’.
Section 4 amends section 71 of the Act by substituting the words
‘‘person ordinarily resident in the State’’ for the words ‘‘stateless
1Click  here  for Act2person habitually resident in the State’’. This amendment harmonises
section 71 with changes being made to other sections of the 2006 Act.
Section 5 inserts a new section 71A into Part 7 of the Criminal
Justice Act 2006. Subsection (1) defines ‘‘directs’’ and provides that‘‘activities’’ includes activities that do not constitute criminaloffences, or that take place outside the State. Subsection (2) of thenew section 71A makes it an offence for any person to direct, at anylevel of a criminal organisation, the activities of such an organisation.The maximum penalty following conviction on indictment isimprisonment for life.
The section seeks to target those in a criminal organisation who
give the orders. Some of these people may not themselves directlyparticipate in the commission of criminal offences. By including thewords ‘‘at any level of the organisation’s structure’’ in subsection (2),it is ensured that persons directing the activities need not necessarilybe one of those at the top of the organisation or that they be shownto be such. Subsection (3) of the new offence permits any statement
or conduct of the accused, causing a reasonable inference that theperson was directing the activities of a criminal organisation, to beadmissible as evidence. Subsection (4) provides guidance for a courtor jury, as the case may be, in determining whether or not an offencehas been committed. Subsection (5) makes provision for inferencesthat may be drawn from documentary evidence. Subsection (6) pro-vides that the definition of ‘‘document or record’’ is as defined insection 71B (as inserted by section 7).
Section 6 amends the Criminal Justice Act 2006 by substituting a
new section for the existing section 72 which relates to participationin organised crime. The new section will simplify the existing offenceof participation in a criminal organisation. Subsection (1) of the newsection, makes it an offence to participate in any activity in the know-ledge that doing so could reasonably, or reckless as to whether suchparticipation would, enhance or facilitate the commission of anoffence by a criminal organisation. Subsection (2) provides a penaltywhere convicted of this offence of a fine and/or up to 15 years impris-onment. Subsection (3) confirms that the commission of a seriousoffence includes an act done outside the State. Subsection (4) pro-vides that it is not necessary to prove that an offence has actuallybeen carried out or that the defendant actually enhanced or facili-tated an offence, or that the defendant knew the specific nature ofany offence. Subsection (5) provides that the court may considerevidence whether or not the person uses a name, word or symbolwhich is associated with the organisation, or receives any benefitfrom the organisation. Subsection (6) provides that certain incrimin-ating articles can be used as evidence that the defendant’s state ofmind was such that he or she had a deliberate intention to committhe offence. The articles or items in question are listed in a Table tothe section.
Section 7 inserts a new section after section 71 of the Criminal
Justice Act 2006 to provide for proof of the evidence of the existenceof a criminal organisation. This will enhance the ability to bring pros-ecutions for offences of directing or participating in organised crime.Subsections (1) and (2) allow for the admissibility of expert opinionevidence of a member, or former member, of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na
(referred to as the ‘‘appropriate expert’’) in determining the exist-ence of a criminal organisation. Subsection (3) further details thetypes of evidence which may be put forward by the appropriateexpert, including evidence of previous convictions of gang membersfor arrestable offences. Subsections (4) and (5) provide thatdocuments and records relevant to the criminal organisation are
admissible as evidence.
Section 8 provides, at subsection (1), a declaration that the ordi-
nary courts are inadequate for the purpose of the effective admin-istration of justice and the preservation of public peace in relation tothe offences contained in Part 7 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006(excluding the conspiracy offence under section 71). This provisionis not permanent and, depending on the threat posed by organisedcrime gangs, will have to be renewed on a regular basis. Subsection(2) has the effect of scheduling the offences specified in subsection(1) for the purpose of the provisions under the Offences against theState Act 1939 relating to the use of the Special Criminal Court. Itallows the Special Criminal Court to hear prosecutions for theoffence in question without prejudice, inter alia, to the power of the
DPP to direct that a person not be sent forward for trial by that court(subsection (3)). Subsections (4) to (6) are the renewal provisionsproviding for the duration of this section. Subsection (4) sets downthe expiry of operation of the section after one year unless a resol-ution continuing the section has been passed by both Houses of theOireachtas. Subsection (5) allows further resolutions permitting, asneeded, the continuation in force of the section. Under subsection(6), the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform shall, beforea resolution is passed by the Houses of the Oireachtas, place a reportbefore each House concerning the operation of the provision todate.
Section 9 provides a new section 72A in the Criminal Justice Act
2006. Subsection (1) of this new provision permits inferences to bedrawn as a result of the failure, in particular circumstances, of anaccused to answer any question material to the investigation of theoffence. It will apply to the organised crime offences under Part 7 ofthe Criminal Justice Act 2006 including the additional offence ofdirecting the activities of a criminal organisation introduced in thisAct. The remaining provisions of the section contain safeguards com-mon to other similar existing provisions in Irish law such as theaccused must be informed of the effect of a failure to answer a ques-tion; a reasonable opportunity must be given to the accused to con-sult a solicitor and the questioning is recorded unless the accusedconsents otherwise. Subsection (7) sets out the meaning of ‘‘anyquestion material to the investigation of the offence’’ and essentiallysuch questions are linked to the evidence provisions of the organisedcrime offences. Subsection (9) confirms that the section shall notapply in relation to a failure to answer a question if the failureoccurred before the passing of the section.
Section 10 amends section 73 ( Commission of an offence for a
criminal organisation) of the Criminal Justice Act 2006, to increase
the penalty for that offence from 10 to 15 years.
Section 11 amends section 74 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006 to
apply the jurisdiction provisions of section 74 ( Proceedings relating
to offences committed outside the State) to the offences of directing
and participating in organised crime.
Section 12 creates a new provision after section 74 of the Criminal
Justice Act 2006 establishing as an aggravating factor, for the pur-pose of sentencing, the fact that a serious offence was committedwithin the framework of a criminal organisation. This provision, inaddition to providing an additional tool for the punishment ofoffences involving organised crime, fulfils an obligation arising underArticle 3.2 of the European Union Council Framework Decision of24 October 2008 on the fight against organised crime.
34Section 13 confirms that a court may exclude evidence if, in the
opinion of the court, the prejudicial effect of evidence outweighs itsprobative value.
Section 14 creates a new provision in the Criminal Justice Act
2007, introducing post-release (restriction on certain activities)orders which can be applied to persons committing certain offences.These orders may apply, in accordance with subsection (1), to organ-ised crime offences under Part 7 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006and to the offences listed in Schedule 2 to the 2007 Act. Schedule 2lists offences to which the sentencing provisions contained in Part 3of the 2007 Act apply, namely the provisions on repeat offending(section 25) and monitoring and protection of persons orders (section26). The court-issued order will apply following release from prisonfor the purpose of restricting the offender including restrictions onhis or her movements, actions, activities or association with others.The order may also involve the imposition of conditions on anoffender as to, for example, their engagement in any activity(subsection (3)). The imposition of an order under this section issubject to the public interest and other relevant matters before thecourt (subsection (2)). Under subsection (4), an order may apply fora period up to 7 years following release. Also under this section, anoffender may apply to the court to vary or revoke the order. Failureto comply with a post-release (restriction of certain activities) orderis an offence liable on conviction to a fine of up to \5,000 and/or
imprisonment for up to 12 months. Subsection (10) requires theMinister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform to prepare, within sixmonths, a scheme specifying two or more categories of restrictionsand conditions that may be imposed by a post-release (restrictionson movement) order. The scheme must be approved by a resolutionof both Houses.
Section 15 amends the Schedule to the Bail Act 1997. The
Schedule lists the offences that are defined as ‘‘serious offences’’ andsection 2 of the Bail Act provides for the circumstances in which bailmay be refused for such offences. As a result of this amendment,the new directing offence under section 5 will also be added to the
Bail Schedule.
Section 16 increases the penalty for the offence of intimidation of
witnesses, jurors or others from 10 years to 15 years.
Section 17 provides that the procedure available under section 13
of the Criminal Procedure Act 1967 whereby the District Court may,in the circumstances where an accused person pleads guilty to anindictable offence, deal with that offence summarily or send theaccused forward for sentencing shall not apply to the directing theactivities of a criminal organisation offence introduced by this Act.
Section 29 of the Criminal Procedure Act 1967 is also amended to
provide that a person charged with the directing offence may beadmitted to bail only by the High Court. This is consistent with thetreatment of the other offences under Part 7 of the Criminal JusticeAct 2006.
PART 3
Offences under certain enactments;
provisions for extra-territorial effect
Section 18 provides for jurisdiction over obstruction of justice
offences relating to interference with the actions of the judiciary orlaw enforcement authorities and where committed on board an Irish
ship, aircraft, or such offences committed by an Irish citizen/residentwhile in another jurisdiction. This is an important new provision toensure that persons involved in organised crime can be pursued inrespect of transnational offences. These provisions also meet ourobligations under the UN Convention against TransnationalOrganised Crime.
Section 19 provides for jurisdiction over the offence of inducement
of witnesses to give false testimony where committed on board anIrish ship, aircraft, or such an offence committed by an Irishcitizen/resident while in another jurisdiction. This provision ensuresthat persons involved in organised crime can be pursued in respectof transnational offences. These provisions also meet our obligationsunder the UN Convention against Transnational Organised Crime.
Section 20 provides for jurisdiction over the offence of intimidation
of witnesses, jurors or others where committed on board an Irishship, aircraft, or such an offence committed by an Irishcitizen/resident while in another jurisdiction. As with sections 18 and19, this provision meets an obligation under the UN Convention onTransnational Organised Crime.
PART 4
Amendments concerning detention and re-arrest powers
The purpose of this Part is to amend the Garda detention and
re-arrest powers contained in:
•the Offences against the State Act 1939,
•the Criminal Justice (Drug Trafficking) Act 1996,
•the Criminal Justice Act 2007, and
•the Criminal Justice Act 1984.
Section 21 amends sections 30 and 30A of the Offences against the
State Act 1939, as amended. Subsection (1) amends section 30.Section 30 provides that a person suspected of committing anyoffence under the 1939 Act or any offence that is scheduled for thepurposes of Part V of the Act (i.e. may be tried before the SpecialCriminal Court) may be detained for up to 72 hours where that isnecessary for the proper investigation of the offence in question. Thefirst 48 hours is subject to Garda authorisation and the remaining 24hours are subject to judicial authorisation.
Paragraph ( a) inserts a new subsection (3A) in order to provide
that a person detained under section 30 may continue to be detainedfor an offence other than the offence to which the detention relates.In order for this provision to apply: the ‘‘other offence’’ must comewithin the category of offences to which section 30 applies; a memberof the Garda Sı ´ocha´na must have reasonable cause to suspect the
detained person’s involvement in the other offence; and the memberin charge of the Garda station or, in the event that the person isdetained in a place other than a Garda station as permitted by thesection, a member of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na not below the rank of
inspector must have reasonable grounds for believing that the con-tinued detention of the person is necessary for the proper investi-gation of the other offence concerned. The person may not bedetained in excess of the maximum allowed i.e. 72 hours. The otherstatutory detention powers already include a provision along theselines.
56Paragraph ( b) makes a number of changes to the procedures
applying to the extension of time application under section 30(4).
A new subsection (4BA) is inserted in order to minimise the risk
of prejudice to the criminal investigation concerned arising from thedisclosure of information during the hearing of the extension of timeapplication. The judge is given discretion: to direct that the appli-cation be heard otherwise than in public; to limit attendance at thehearing to the persons directly concerned with the application,officers of the court and bona fide representatives of the Press; andto direct that certain information be disclosed in the absence of thesuspect and legal representatives. The new subsection also prohibitsthe publication or broadcasting of any information about an appli-cation under subsection (4) other than the fact that the applicationhas been made by the Gardaı ´in relation to a particular investigation
and the decision on the application. Breach of this prohibition is acriminal offence.
A new subsection (4BB) is inserted in order to make it clear that
the lawfulness of the arrest or detention of the suspect is not nor-mally a matter to be raised during the hearing of an application foran extension of time. Such matters are properly the subject of ahabeas corpus application to the High Court.
A new subsection (4BC) is inserted in order to provide that the
officer of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na making the application for an exten-
sion of time (who must be a superintendent or above) may giveevidence of matters related to the application not within his/her per-sonal knowledge but within the personal knowledge of anothermember i.e. hearsay evidence may be given by the applicant officer.The judge hearing the application may in the interests of justicedirect another member to attend to give direct oral evidence. Thehearing may be adjourned to allow time for the member to attend.
Paragraph ( c) substitutes subsection (4D) (inserted by section 187
of the Criminal Justice Act 2006) in order to provide that where thedetention period expires while the suspect is at the venue for thehearing of the extension of time application it shall be deemed notto expire until such time as the application is determined by thejudge. This provision is subject to the safeguard that the time ofarrival of the suspect must be certified by a court clerk in attendanceat the venue. As the law stands at present it only addresses the situa-tion where the detention period would expire during the hearing.
Subsection (2) amends section 30A (inserted by section 11 of the
Offences against the State (Amendment) Act 1998) in order to addto the grounds on which a court may authorise the re-arrest of aperson previously detained under section 30 of the 1939 Act butreleased without charge. Section 30A provides that a warrant issuedby a District Court judge is required to arrest a person again for theoffence to which his or her detention related or for an offence whichat the time of the first arrest the arresting member suspected orought reasonably to have suspected the person of having committed.Prior to the enactment of this provision an application for a rearrestwarrant could only be grounded on information that had come tothe knowledge of the Gardaı ´after the person’s release. This amend-
ment adds an alternative ground viz., that notwithstanding that the
Gardaı ´had knowledge of the person’s suspected participation in the
commission of the offence for which his or her arrest is sought, prior
to his or her release, the questioning of the person in relation to that
offence prior to release would not have been in the interests of theproper investigation of the offence. An application for an arrest war-rant under this section is to be heard otherwise than in public.Subsection (3) makes a consequential amendment to section
30A(2) arising from the amendment to section 30.
Section 22 amends sections 2, 4, 5 and 11 of the Criminal Justice
(Drug Trafficking) Act 1996.
Subsection (1) amends section 2 of the Act. Section 2 provides
that a person suspected of committing a drug trafficking offence (asdefined in section 3(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1994) may bedetained for up to 7 days for the proper investigation of the offence— 48 hours under Garda authority and a further 120 hours underjudicial authority.
Paragraph ( a) amends section 2(2) in order that a member of the
Garda Sı ´ocha´na not below the rank of superintendent, rather than a
garda not below the rank of chief superintendent may authorise thedetention of a suspect for 18 hours beyond the first 6 hour period ofdetention which is generally authorised by the member in charge.
Paragraph ( b) makes a number of changes to the procedures
applying to the extension of time application under section 2(2).
A new subsection (3A) is inserted in order to minimise the risk of
prejudice to the criminal investigation concerned arising from thedisclosure of information during the hearing of the extension of timeapplication. The judge is given discretion: to direct that the appli-cation be heard otherwise than in public; to limit attendance at thehearing to the persons directly concerned with the application,officers of the court and bona fide representatives of the Press; andto direct that certain information be disclosed in the absence of thesuspect and legal representatives. The new subsection also prohibitsthe publication or broadcasting of any information about an appli-cation under subsection (2) other than the fact that the applicationhas been made by the Gardaı ´in relation to a particular investigation
and the decision on the application. Breach of this prohibition is acriminal offence.
A new subsection (3B) is inserted in order to make it clear that the
lawfulness of the arrest or detention of the suspect is not normally amatter to be raised during the hearing of an application for an exten-sion of time. Such matters are properly the subject of a habeas corpusapplication to the High Court.
A new subsection (3C) is inserted in order to provide that the
officer of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na making the application for an exten-
sion of time (who must be a chief superintendent or above) maygive evidence of matters related to the application not within his/herpersonal knowledge but within the personal knowledge of anothermember i.e. hearsay evidence may be given by the applicant officer.The judge hearing the application may in the interests of justicedirect another member to attend to give direct oral evidence. Thehearing may be adjourned to allow time for the member to attend.
Paragraph ( c) substitutes subsection (7A) (inserted by section 10
of the Criminal Justice Act 2006) in order to provide that where thedetention period expires while the suspect is at the venue for thehearing of the extension of time application it shall be deemed notto expire until such time as the application is determined by thejudge. This provision is subject to the safeguard that the time of
arrival of the suspect must be certified by a court clerk in attendanceat the venue. As the law stands at present it only addresses the situa-tion where the detention period would expire during the hearing.
78Subsection (2) amends section 4 of the Act in order to add to the
grounds on which a court may authorise the re-arrest of a personpreviously detained under section 2 of the Act but released withoutcharge. Section 4 provides a warrant issued by a judge of the DistrictCourt or a judge of the Circuit Court is required before such a personmay be arrested again for the offence to which his or her detentionrelated or for an offence which at the time of the first arrest thearresting member suspected or ought reasonably to have suspectedthe person of having committed. Prior to the enactment of this pro-vision an application for a rearrest warrant could only be groundedon information that had come to the knowledge of the Gardaı ´after
the person’s release. This amendment adds an alternative ground
viz., that notwithstanding that the Gardaı ´had knowledge of the
person’s suspected participation in the commission of the offence forwhich his or her arrest is sought, prior to his or her release, the
questioning of the person in relation to that offence prior to releasewould not have been in the interests of the proper investigation ofthe offence. An application for an arrest warrant under this sectionis to be held otherwise than in public.
Subsection (3) amends section 5 of the Act. It applies an amend-
ment to section 4 of the Criminal Justice Act 1984 (see section 24 ofthe Act) to persons detained under section 2 of the 1996 Act.
Subsection (4) repeals section 11 of the 1996 Act. The effect of
this is to make sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Act permanent therebyeliminating the need for these sections to be renewed every two yearsby a resolution of the Houses of the Oireachtas.
Section 23 amends sections 50, 51 and 52 of the Criminal Justice
Act 2007. Section 50 provides that a person suspected of committing:murder involving the use of a firearm or explosive, murder to whichsection 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 1990 applies (capital murder),an offence under section 15 of the Firearms Act 1925 (possession offirearms with intent to endanger life) or an offence under section 15of the Non-fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997 involving theuse of a firearm (the offence of false imprisonment) may be detained
for up to 7 days for the proper investigation of the offence — 48hours under Garda authority and a further 120 hours under judicialauthority.
Subsection (1) amends section 50(1) of the Act in order to extend
the list of offences to which the section applies. The offences underPart 7 of the Criminal Justice Act 2007 (organised crime offences)are added.
Subsection (2) amends section 50 in order to make a number of
changes to the procedures applying to the extension of time appli-cation under section 50(3).
A new subsection (4A) is inserted in order to minimise the risk of
prejudice to the criminal investigation concerned arising from thedisclosure of information during the hearing of the extension of timeapplication. The judge is given discretion: to direct that the appli-cation be heard otherwise than in public; to limit attendance at thehearing to the persons directly concerned with the application,officers of the court and bona fide representatives of the Press; andto direct that certain information be disclosed in the absence of thesuspect and legal representatives. The new subsection also prohibitsthe publication or broadcasting of any information about an appli-cation under subsection (3) other than the fact that the applicationhas been made by the Gardaı ´in relation to a particular investigationand the decision on the application. Breach of this prohibition is a
criminal offence.
A new subsection (4B) is inserted in order to make it clear that the
lawfulness of the arrest or detention of the suspect is not normally amatter to be raised at the hearing of an application for an extensionof time. Such matters are properly the subject of a habeas corpusapplication to the High Court.
A new subsection (4C) is inserted in order to provide that the
officer of the Garda Sı ´ocha´na making the application for an exten-
sion of time (who must be a chief superintendent or above) maygive evidence of matters related to the application not within his/herpersonal knowledge but within the personal knowledge of anothermember i.e. hearsay evidence may be given by the applicant officer.The judge hearing the application may in the interests of justicedirect another member to attend to give direct oral evidence. Thehearing may be adjourned to allow time for the member to attend.
Paragraph ( b) substitutes subsection (9) in order to provide that
where the detention period expires while the suspect is at the venuefor the hearing of the extension of time application it shall bedeemed not to expire until such time as the application is determinedby the judge. This provision is subject to the safeguard that the timeof arrival of the suspect must be certified by a court clerk in attend-ance at the venue. As the law stands at present it only addresses thesituation where the detention period would expire during the
hearing.
Subsection (3) amends section 51 in order to add to the grounds
on which a court may authorise the re-arrest of a person previouslydetained under section 50 of the Act but released without charge.Section 51 provides that a warrant issued by a District Court judgeor a Circuit Court judge is required to arrest such a person again for
the offence to which his or her detention related or for an offencewhich at the time of the first arrest the arresting member suspectedor ought reasonably to have suspected the person of having commit-ted. Prior to the enactment of this provision an application for arearrest warrant could only be grounded on information that hadcome to the knowledge of the Gardaı ´after the person’s release. This
amendment adds an alternative ground viz., that notwithstanding
that the Gardaı ´had knowledge of the person’s suspected partici-
pation in the commission of the offence for which his or her arrestis sought, prior to his or her release, the questioning of the person
in relation to that offence prior to release would not have been inthe interests of the proper investigation of the offence. An appli-cation for an arrest warrant under this section shall be heard other-wise than in public.
Subsection (4) amends section 52 of the Act. It applies an amend-
ment to section 4 of the Criminal Justice Act 1984 (see section 23 ofthe Act) to persons detained under section 50 of the 2007 Act.
Section 24 amends sections 4, 9 and 10 of the Criminal Justice Act
1984. Section 4 of the Act provides that a person may be detainedfor up to 24 hours subject to Garda authorisation where this is neces-sary for the proper investigation of an arrestable offence (an offencepunishable by 5 years or more). The 24 hour maximum does notinclude any periods not to be reckoned in its calculation e.g. absencesfrom the Garda station connected with the making of a habeas cor-pus application (section 4(8A)) and to attend hospital (section 4(8)).
910Subsection (1) amends section 4 of the Act by inserting a new
subsection (8B). Section 4(8) already provides that any time that aperson detained under section 4 is absent from the station for thepurpose of hospitalisation is to be excluded in the reckoning of thedetention period. New subsection (8B) seeks to address the situationwhere a detainee is assessed as unfit for questioning but does notrequire hospitalisation, for example where the detainee is intoxi-cated. It is proposed that where a medical practitioner certifies thatthe detainee is unfit for questioning no questioning shall take placeduring the period certified and that period shall not be included inthe reckoning of the detention period. The period cannot exceed 6hours and a certificate can be provided on one occasion only. Para-graph (b) makes a consequential amendment to section 4(9).
Subsection (2) amends section 9 of the Act. The effect of this is to
apply section 4(8B) to persons detained under section 30 of theOffences against the State Act 1939.
Subsection (3) amends section 10 of the Act in order to add to the
grounds on which a court may authorise the re-arrest of a personpreviously detained under section 4 of the Act but released withoutcharge. Section 10 provides that a warrant issued by a District Courtjudge is required before such a person may be arrested again for theoffence to which his or her detention related or for an offence whichat the time of the first arrest the arresting member suspected orought reasonably to have suspected the person of having committed.Prior to the enactment of this provision an application for a rearrestwarrant could only be grounded on information that had come tothe knowledge of the Gardaı ´after the person’s release. This amend-
ment adds an alternative ground viz., that notwithstanding that the
Gardaı ´had knowledge of the person’s suspected participation in the
commission of the offence for which his or her arrest is sought, prior
to his or her release, the questioning of the person in relation to that
offence prior to release would not have been in the interests of theproper investigation of the offence. An application for an arrest war-rant under this section shall be heard otherwise than in public.
PART 5
Miscellaneous
Section 25 amends section 6 of the Offences against the State
(Amendment) Act 1998, which deals with the offence of directing
activities of an unlawful organisation. These amendments are
required to ensure consistency with the offence of directing activities
of a criminal organisation contained in section 5 of this Act.
Section 26 clarifies that all applications for search warrants
whether to a court or a judge are to be heard otherwise than inpublic.
Financial Implications
The Act may give rise to additional costs insofar as the Act may
result in prosecutions of persons accused of offences under it.However, there are no grounds for believing that any significantexpenditure will arise.
An Roinn Dlı ´agus Cirt, Comhionannais agus Athcho ´irithe Dlı ´,
Iu´il,2009.
Wt. —. 542. 10/09. Cahills. (X54862) Gr. 30-15.